
12. Choose a suitable design and hold to it.

A basic structural design underlies every kind of writing.  Writers will in part follow this design, in part deviate
from it, according to their skills, their needs, and the unexpected events that accompany the act of composition.
Writing, to be effective, must follow closely the thoughts of the writer, but not necessarily in the order in which
those thoughts occur. This calls for a scheme of procedure. In some cases, the best design is no design, as with a love
letter, which is simply an outpouring, or with a casual essay, which is a ramble. But in most cases, planning must be a
deliberate prelude to writing. The first principle of composition, therefore, is to foresee or determine the shape of
what is to come and pursue that shape.

A sonnet is built on a fourteen-line frame, each line containing five feet. Hence, sonneteers know exactly where they
are headed, although they may not know how to get there. Most forms of composition are less clearly defined, more
flexible, but all have skeletons to which the writer will bring the flesh and the blood. The more clearly the writer
perceives the shape, the better are the chances of success.

13. Make the paragraph the unit of composition.

The paragraph is a convenient unit; it serves all forms of literary work. As long as it holds together, a paragraph may
be of any length—a single, short sentence or a passage of great duration.

If the subject on which you are writing is of slight extent, or if you intend to treat it briefly, there may be no need
to divide it into topics. Thus, a brief description, a brief book review, a brief account of a single incident, a
narrative merely outlining an action, the setting forth of a single idea—any one of these is best written in a single
paragraph. After the paragraph has been written, examine it to see whether division will improve it.

Ordinarily, however, a subject requires division into topics, each of which should be dealt with in a paragraph. The
object of treating each topic in a paragraph by itself is, of course, to aid the reader. The beginning of each paragraph
is a signal that a new step in the development of the subject has been reached.

As a rule, single sentences should not be written or printed as paragraphs. An exception may be made of sentences of
transition, indicating the relation between the parts of an exposition or argument.

In dialogue, each speech, even if only a single word, is usually a paragraph by itself; that is, a new paragraph begins
with each change of speaker. The application of this rule when dialogue and narrative are combined is best learned from
examples in well-edited works of fiction. Sometimes a writer, seeking to create an effect of rapid talk or for some
other reason, will elect not to set off each speech in a separate paragraph and instead will run speeches together.  The
common practice, however, and the one that serves best in most instances, is to give each speech a paragraph of its own.

As a rule, begin each paragraph either with a sentence that suggests the topic or with a sentence that helps the
transition. If a paragraph forms part of a larger composition, its relation to what precedes, or its function as a part
of the whole, may need to be expressed. This can sometimes be done by a mere word or phrase (again, therefore, for the
same reason) in the first sentence. Sometimes, however, it is expedient to get into the topic slowly, by way of a
sentence or two of introduction or transition.


In narration and description, the paragraph sometimes begins with a concise, comprehensive statement serving to hold
together the details that follow. 

    The breeze served us admirably. 
    The campaign opened with a series of reverses. 
    The next ten or twelve pages were filled with a curious set of entries. 

But when this device, or any device, is too often used, it becomes a mannerism. More commonly, the opening sentence
Simply indicates by its subject the direction the paragraph is to take. 

    At length I thought I might return toward the stockade. 
    He picked up the heavy lamp from the table and began to explore. 
    Another flight of steps, and they emerged on the roof. 

In animated narrative, the paragraphs are likely to be short and without any semblance of a topic sentence, the writer
rushing headlong, event following event in rapid succession. The break between such paragraphs merely serves the purpose
of a rhetorical pause, throwing into prominence some detail of the action. 

In general, remember that paragraphing calls for a good eye as well as a logical mind. Enormous blocks of print look
formidable to readers, who are often reluctant to tackle them.  Therefore, breaking long paragraphs in two, even if it
is not necessary to do so for sense, meaning, or logical development, is often a visual help. But remember, too, that
firing off many short paragraphs in quick succession can be distracting.  Paragraph breaks used only for show read like
the writing of commerce or of display advertising. Moderation and a sense of order should be the main considerations in
paragraphing.

Use the active voice.

The active voice is usually more direct and vigorous than the passive:

    I shall always remember my first visit to Boston.

This is much better than

    My first visit to Boston will always be remembered by me.

The latter sentence is less direct, less bold, and less concise. If the writer tries to make it more concise by omitting “by me,”

    My first visit to Boston will always be remembered,

it becomes indefinite: is it the writer or some undisclosed person or the world at large that will always remember this visit?

This rule does not, of course, mean that the writer should entirely discard the passive voice, which is frequently convenient and sometimes necessary.

    The dramatists of the Restoration are little esteemed today.
    Modern readers have little esteem for the dramatists of the Restoration.

The first would be the preferred form in a paragraph on the dramatists of the Restoration, the second in a paragraph on the tastes of modern readers. The need to make a particular word the subject of the sentence will often, as in these examples, determine which voice is to be used.

The habitual use of the active voice, however, makes for forcible writing. This is true not only in narrative concerned principally with action but in writing of any kind. Many a tame sentence of description or exposition can be made lively and emphatic by substituting a transitive in the active voice for some such perfunctory expression as there is or could be heard.

19:

    There were a great number of dead leaves lying on the ground.
    Dead leaves covered the ground.

    At dawn the crowing of a rooster could be heard.
    The cock’s crow came with dawn.

    The reason he left college was that his health became impaired.
    Failing health compelled him to leave college.

    It was not long before she was very sorry that she had said what she had.
    She soon repented her words.

Note, in the examples above, that when a sentence is made stronger, it usually becomes shorter. Thus, brevity is a by-product of vigor.

15. Put statements in positive form.

Make definite assertions. Avoid tame, colorless, hesitating, noncommittal language. Use the word not as a means of denial or in antithesis, never as a means of evasion.

    He was not very often on time.
    He usually came late.

    She did not think that studying Latin was a sensible way to use one’s time.
    She thought the study of Latin a waste of time.

    The Taming of the Shrew is rather weak in spots. Shakespeare does not portray Katharine as a very admirable character, nor does Bianca remain long in memory as an important character in Shakespeare’s works.
    The women in The Taming of the Shrew are unattractive. Katharine is disagreeable, Bianca insignificant.

The last example, before correction, is indefinite as well as negative. The corrected version, consequently, is simply a guess at the writer’s intention.

20: 

All three examples show the weakness inherent in the word not. Consciously or unconsciously, the reader is dissatisfied with being told only what is not; the reader wishes to be told what is. Hence, as a rule, it is better to express even a negative in positive form.

    not honest
    dishonest

    not important
    trifling

    did not remember
    forgot

    did not pay any attention to
    ignored

    did not have much confidence in
    distrusted

Placing negative and positive in opposition makes for a stronger structure.

    Not charity, but simple justice.
    Not that I loved Caesar less, but that I loved Rome more.
    Ask not what your country can do for you—ask what you can do for your country.

Negative words other than not are usually strong.

    Her loveliness I never knew / Until she smiled on me.

Statements qualified with unnecessary auxiliaries or conditionals sound irresolute.

    If you would let us know the time of your arrival, we would be happy to arrange your transportation from the airport.
    If you will let us know the time of your arrival, we shall be happy to arrange your transportation from the airport.

    Applicants can make a good impression by being neat and punctual.
    Applicants will make a good impression if they are neat and punctual.

    Plath may be ranked among those modern poets who died young.
    Plath was one of those modern poets who died young.

If your every sentence admits a doubt, your writing will lack authority. Save the auxiliaries would, should, could, may, might, and can for situations involving real uncertainty.
