WILLIAM

UNKJR.
HITE
AND

E.B.

lilfl~ fflmk, .<ffla/l ~"(JuJ(h aJId imptlnlmr
fO ("arr; in your !/(}(.'kn, 11.1 I carf\' mine,"

" .5/;/1 a

-

e,wu/lh

Charles Osgood

FOURTH EDITION

FOREWORD

BY

ROGER ANGELL

THE

ELEMENTS
OF

BY

WILLIAM STRUNK

Jr.

With Revisions, an Introduction, .
and a Chapter on Writing
BY

E. B. WHITE
FOURTH

EDITION

ALLYN AND BACON
Boston London Toronto Sydney Tokyo Singapore

Contents
I

FOREWORD
INTRODUCTION
I.

ELEMENTARY RULES OF USAGE
1. Form the possessive singular of nouns
by adding's.
2. In a series of three or more terms with
a single conjunction, use a comma after
each term except the last.
3. Enclose parenthetic expressions
between commas.
4. Place a comma before a conjunction
introducing an independent clause.
5. Do not join independent clauses with
a comma.
6. Do not break sentences in two.
7. Use a colon after an independent clause
to introduce a list of particulars, an
appositive, an amplification, or an
illustrative quotation.
8. Use a dash to set off an abrupt break
or interruption and to announce a long
appositive or summary.
9. The number of the subject determines
the number of the verb.
10. Use the proper case of pronoun.

.

IX

...

XUl

1
1

2
2

5
5
7

7

9
9
11

vi]

CONTENTS

11. A participial phrase at the beginning
of a sentence must refer to the grammatical subject.

II. ELEMENTARY PRINCIPLES OF
COMPOSITION
12. Choose a suitable design and hold to it.
13. Make the paragraph the unit of composition.
14. Use the active voice.
15. Put statements in positive form.
16. Use definite, specific, concrete language.
17. Omit needless words.
18. Avoid a succession of Ioase sentences.
19. Express coordinate ideas in similar form.
20. Keep related words together.
21. In summaries, keep to one tense.
22. Place the emphatic words of a sentence
at the end.

13

15
15

15
18
19
21
23
25
26
28
31
32

III. A FEW MATTERS OF FORM

34

IV WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS
COMMONLY MISUSED

39

\Z AN APPROACH TO STYLE
(With a List of Reminders)
1. Place yourself in the background.
2. Write in a way that comes naturally.
3. Work from a suitable design.
4. Write with nouns and verbs.
5. Revise and rewrite.
6. Do not overwrite.
7. Do not overstate.
8. Avoid the use of qualifiers.
9. Do not affect a breezy manner.
10. Use orthodox spelling.

66

70
70
70
71
72
72
73
73
73
74

CONTENTS

11. Do not explain too much.
12. Do not construct awkward adverbs.

13. Make sure the reader knows who is
speaking.
14. Avoid fancy words.
15. Do not use dialect unless your ear is
good.
16. Be clear.
17. Do not inject opinion.
18. Use figures of speech sparingly.
19. Do not take shortcuts at the cost of
clarity.
20. Avoid foreign languages.

21. Prefer the standard to the offbeat.

[vii
75
75
76
76

78
79
79
80

80
81
.81

AFTERWORD

87

GLOSSARY

89

INDEX

97

Foreword
by Roger Angell

THE FIRST writer I watched at work was

my stepfather, E. B.

White. Each Tuesday morning, he would close his study
door and sit down to write the ((Notes and Comment" page
for The New Yorker. The task was familiar to him-he was
required to file a few hundred words of editorial or personal
commentary on some topic in or out of the news that
week-but the sounds of his typewriter from his room came
in hesitant bursts, with long silences in between. Hours
went by. Summoned at last for lunch, he was silent and
preoccupied, and soon excused himself to get back to the
job. When the copy went off at last, in the afternoon RFD
pouch-we were in Maine, a day's mail away from New
York-he rarely seemed satisfied. "It isn't good enough," he
said sometimes. "I wish it were better."
Writing is hard, even for authors who do it all the time.
Less frequent practitioners-the job applicant; the business
executive with an annual report to get out; the high school
senior with a Faulkner assignment; the graduate-school
student with her thesis proposal; the writer of a letter of
condolence-often get stuck in an awkward passage or find
a muddle on their screens, and then blame themselves.
What should be easy and flowing looks tangled or feeble or
overblown-not what was meant at all. What's wrong with
me, each one thinks. Why can't I get this right?

ix

x]

FOREWORD

It was this recurring question, put to himself, that must
have inspired White to revive and add to a textbook by an
English professor of his, Will Strunk Jr., that he had first
read in college, and to get it published. The result, this quiet
book, has been in print for forty years, and has offered more
than ten million writers a helping hand. White knew that
a compendium of specific tips-about singular and plural
verbs, parentheses, the "that"-C<which" scuffle, and many
others-could clear up a recalcitrant sentence or subclause
when quickly reconsulted, and that the larger principles
needed to be kept in plain sight, like a wall sampler.
How simple they look, set down here in White's last
chapter: "Write in a way that comes naturally," "Revise and
rewrite," "Do not explain too much," and the rest; above all,
the cleansing, clarion "Be clear." How often I have turned
to them, in the book or in my mind, while trying to start or
unblock or revise some piece of my own writing! They
help-they really do. They work. They are the way.
E. B. White's prose is celebrated for its ease and clarityjust think of Charlotte's Web-but maintaining this standard required endless attention. When the new issue of
The New Yorker turned up in Maine, I sometimes saw him
reading his "Comment" piece over to himself, with only a
slightly different expression than the one he'd worn on the
day it went off. Well, O.K., he seemed to be saying. At least
I got the elements right.
This edition has been modestly updated, with word processors and air conditioners making their first appearance
among White's references, and with a light redistribution of
genders to permit a feminine pronoun or female farmer to
take their places among the males who once innocently
seIVed hinl. Sylvia Plath has knocked Keats out of the box,
and I notice that "America" has become "this country" in a
sample text, to forestall a subsequent and possibly demeaning "she" in the same paragraph. What is not here is anything
about E-mail-the rules-free, lower-case flow that cheerfully keeps us in touch these days. E-mail is conversation,

FOREWORD

[xi

and it may be replacing the sweet and endless talking we
once sustained (and tucked away) within the informal letter.
But we are all writers and readers as well as communicators,
with the need at times to please and satisfy ourselves (as
White put it) with the clear and almost perfect thought.

Introduction *

AT THE close of the first World War, when I was a student
at Cornell, I took a course called English 8. My professor
was William Strunk Jr. A textbook required for the course
was a slim volume called The Elements of Style, whose
author was the professor himself. The year was 1919. The
book was known on the campus in those days as 'lhe little
book," with the stress on the word "little." It had been privately printed by the author.
I passed the course, graduated from the university, and
forgot the book but not the professor. Some thirty-eight
years later, the book bobbed up again in my life when Macmillan commissioned me to revise it for the college market
and the general trade. Meantime, Professor Strunk had
died.
The Elements of Style, when I reexamined it in 1957,
seemed to me to contain rich deposits of gold. It was Will
Strunk's paroum opus, his attempt to cut the vast tangle of
English rhetoric down to size and write its rules and principles on the head of a pin. Will himself had hung the tag
"little" on the book; he referred to it sardonically and with
secret pride as "the little book," always giving the word
"little" a special twist, as though he were putting a spin on
a ball. In its original form, it was a forty-three page summation of the case for cleanliness, accuracy, and brevity in
the use of English. Today, fifty-two years later, its vigor is
*E. B. White wrote this introduction for the 1979 edition.
xiii

xiv]

I N T ROD U C T ION

unimpaired, and for sheer pith I think it probably sets a
record that is not likely to be broken. Even after I got
through tampering with it, it was still a tiny thing, a barely
tarnished gem. Seven rules of usage, eleven principles of
composition, a few matters of form, and a list of words and
expressions commonly misused-that was the sum and
substance of Professor Strunk's work. Somewhat audaciously, and in an attempt to give my publisher his money's
worth, I added a chapter called "An Approach to Style,"
setting forth my own prejudices, my notions of error, my
articles of faith. This chapter (Chapter V) is addressed particularly to those who feel that English prose composition
is not only a necessary skill but a sensible pursuit as wella way to spend one's days. I think Professor Strunk would
not object to that.
A second edition of the book was published in 1972. I
have now completed a third revision. Chapter IV has been
refurbished with words and expressions of a recent vintage;
four rules of usage have been added to Chapter I. Fresh
examples have been added to some of the rules and principles, amplification has reared its head in a few places in the
text where I felt an assault could successfully be made on
the bastions of its brevity, and in general the book has
received a thorough overhaul-to correct errors, delete
be\vhiskered entries, and enliven the argument.
Professor Strunk was a positive man. His book contains
rules of grammar phrased as direct orders. In the main I
have not tried to soften his commands, or modify his pronouncements, or remove the special objects of his scorn. I
have tried, instead, to preserve the flavor of his discontent
while slightly enlarging the scope ofthe discussion. The Elements of Style does not pretend to survey the whole field.
Rather it proposes to give in brief space the principal requirements of plain English style. It concentrates on fundamentals: the rules of usage and principles of composition
most commonly violated.
The reader will soon discover that these rules and principles are in the form of sharp commands, Sergeant Strunk
snapping orders to his platoon. «Do not join independent

INTRODUCTION

[xv

clauses with a comma." (Rule 5.) "Do not break sentences
in two." (Rule 6.) «Use the active voice." (Rule 14.) '"Omit
needless words.~' (Rule 17.) "Avoid a succession of loose
sentences." (Rule 18.) «In summaries, keep to one tense."
(Rule 21.) Each rule or principle is followed by a short hortatory essay, and usually the exhortation is followed by, or
interlarded with, exaUlpIes in parallel colurnns-the true vs.
the false, the right vs. the wrong, the timid vs. the bold, the
ragged vs. the trim. From every line there peers out at me
the puckish face of my professor, his short hair parted neatly in the middle and combed down over his forehead, his
eyes blinking incessantly behind steel-rimmed spectacles as
though he had just emerged into strong light, his lips nibbling each other like nervous horses, his smile shuttling to
and fro under a carefully edged mustache.
«Omit needless words!" cries the author on page 23, and
into that imperative Will Strunk really put his heart and
soul. In the days when I was sitting in his class, he omitted
so many needless words, and omitted them so forcibly and
with such eagerness and obvious relish, that he often
seemed in the position of having shortchanged himself-a
man left with nothing more to say yet with time to fill, a radio
prophet who had out-distanced the clock. Will Strunk got
out of this predicament by a simple trick: he uttered every
sentence three times. When he delivered his oration on
brevity to the class, he leaned forward over his desk, grasped
his coat lapels in his hands, and, in a husky, conspiratorial
voice, said, "Rule Seventeen. Omit needless words! Omit
needless words! Omit needless words!"
He was a memorable man, friendly and funny. Under the
remembered sting of his kindly lash, I have been trying to
omit needless words since 1919, and although there are still
many words that cry for omission and the huge task will
never be accomplished, it is exciting to me to reread the
masterly Strunkian elaboration of this noble theme. It goes:
Vigorous writing is concise. A sentence should contain
no unnecessary words, a paragraph no unnecessary sentences, for the same reason that a drawing should have no

xvi]

INTRODUCTION

unnecessary lines and a machine no unnecessary parts.
This requires not that the writer make all sentences short
or avoid all detail and treat subjects only in outline, but
that every word tell.
There you have a short, valuable essay on the nature and
beauty of brevity-fifty-nine words that could change the
world. Having recovered from his adventure in prolixity
(fifty-nine words were a lot of words in the tight world of
William Strunk Jr.), the professor proceeds to give a few
quick lessons in pruning. Students learn to cut the deadwood from "this is a subject that," reducing it to "this subject," a saving of three words. They learn to trim "used for
fuel purposes" do\Vl1 to "used for fuel." They learn that they
are being chatterboxes when they say "the question as to
whether" and that they should just say "whether"-a saving
of four words out of a possible five.
The professor devotes a speCial paragraph to the vile
expression the fact that, a phrase that causes him to quiver
with revulsion. The expression, he says, should be "revised
out of every sentence in which it occurs." But a shadow of
gloom seems to hang over the page, and you feel that he
knows how hopeless his cause is. I suppose I have written
the fact that a thousand times in the heat of composition,
revised it out maybe five hundred times in the cool aftermath. To be batting only .500 this late in the season, to fail
half the time to connect with this fat pitch, saddens me, for
it seems a betrayal of the man who showed me how to sMug
at it and made the s\Vinging seem worthwhile.
I treasure The Elements of Style for its sharp advice, but
I treasure it even more for the audacity and self-confidence
of its author. Will knew where he stood. He was so sure of
where he stood, and made his position so clear and so plausible, that his peculiar stance has continued to invigorate
me-and, I am sure, thousands of other ex-students--during
the years that have intervened since our first encounter. He
had a number of likes and dislikes that were almost as
whimsical as the choice of a necktie, yet he made them
seem utterly convincing. He disliked the word forceful and

INTRODUCTION

[xvii

advised us to use forcible instead. He felt that the word
clever was greatly overused: "'It is best restricted to ingenuity displayed in small matters." He despised the expression
student body, which he termed gruesome, and made a special trip downtown to the Alumni News office one day to
protest the expression and suggest that studentry be substituted-a coinage of his own, which he felt was similar to
citizenry. I am told that the News editor was so charmed by
the visit, if not by the word, that he ordered the student
body buried, never to rise again. Studentry has taken its
place. It's not much of an improvement, but it does sound
less cadaverous, and it made Will Strunk quite happy.
Some years ago, when the heir to the throne of England
was a child, I noticed a headline in the Times about Bonnie
Prince Charlie: . . CHARLES~ TONSILS OUT." Immediately Rule
1 leapt to mind.
1. Form the possessive Singular of nouns by adding S.
Follow this rule whatever the final consonant. Thus write,
Charles's friend
Bums's poems
the witch's malice

Clearly, Will Strunk had foreseen, as far back as 1918, the
dangerous tonsillectomy of a prince, in which the surgeon
removes the tonsils and the Tirnes copy desk removes the
final s. He started his book with it. I commend Rule 1 to the
Times, and I trust that Charles's throat, not Charles' throat,
is in fine shape today.
Style rules of this sort are, of course, somewhat a matter
of individual preference, and even the established rules of
grammar are open to challenge. Professor Strunk, although
one of the most inflexible and choosy of men, was quick to
acknowledge the fallacy of inflexibility and the danger of
doctrine. "'It is an old observation/' he wrote, "'that the best
writers sometimes disregard the rules of rhetoric. When
they do so, however, the reader will usually find in the sentence some compensating merit, attained at the cost of the

xviii]

INTRODUCTION

violation. Unless he is certain of doing as well, he will probably do best to follow the rules."
It is encouraging to see how perfectly a book, even a
dusty rule book, perpetuates and extends the spirit of a
man. Will Strunk loved the clear, the brief, the bold, and his
book is clear, brief, bold. Boldness is perhaps its chief distinguishing mark. On page 26, explaining one of his parallels, he says, "The lefthand version gives the impression that
the writer is undecided or timid, apparently unable or afraid
to choose one form of expression and hold to it." And his
original Rule 11 was "Make definite assertions." That was
Will allover. He scorned the vague, the tame, the colorless,
the irresolute. He felt it was worse to be irresolute than to
be wrong. I remember a day in class when he leaned far forward, in his characteristic pose-the pose of a man about to
impart a secret-and croaked, "If you don't know how to
pronounce a word, say it loud! If you don't know how to pronounce a word, say it loud!" This comical piece of advice
struck me as sound at the time, and I still respect it. Why
compound ignorance with inaudibility? Why run and hide?
All through The Elements of Style one finds evidences of
the author's deep sympathy for the reader. Will felt that the
reader was in serious trouble most of the time, floundering
in a swamp, and that it was the duty of anyone attempting
to write English to drain this swamp quickly and get the
reader up on dry ground, or at least to throw a rope. In
revising the text, I have tried to hold steadily in mind this
belief of his, this concern for the bewildered reader.
In the English classes of today, "the little book" is surrounded by longer, lower textbooks-books with permissive
steering and automatic transitions. Perhaps the book has
become something of a curiosity. To me, it still seems to
maintain its original poise, standing, in a drafty time, erect,
resolute, and assured. I still find the Strunkian wisdom a
comfort, the Strunkian humor a delight, and the Strunkian
attitude toward right-and-wrong a blessing undisguised.
E. B. WHITE

I
Elementary Rules
of Usage
1. Form the possessive singular of nouns by adding 's.
Follow this rule whatever the final consonant. Thus
write,
Charles's friend
Bums's poems
the witch's malice

Exceptions are the possessives of ancient proper names
ending in -es and -is, the possessive Jesus', and such forms as
for conscience' sake, for righteousness' sake. But such forms
as Moses' Laws, Isis" temple are commonly replaced by
the laws of Moses
the temple of Isis

The pronominal possessives hers, its, theirs, yours, and
ours have no apostrophe. Indefinite pronouns, however, use
the apostrophe to show possession.
one's rights
somebody else's umbrella

A common error is to write ifs for its, or vice versa. The first
is a contraction, meaning "it is." The second is a possessive.
It's a wise dog that scratches its own fleas.
1

2]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

2. In a series of three or more terms with a single
conjunction, use a comma after each term except the
last.
Thus write,
red, white, and blue
gold, silver, or copper
He opened the letter, read it, and made a note of its
contents.
This comma is often referred to as the '''serial'' comma.
In the names of business firms the last comma is usually
omitted. Follow the usage of the individual firm.
Little, Brown and Company
Donaldson, Lufkin & Jenrette

3. Enclose parenthetic expressions between commas.
The best way to see a country, unless you are pressed
for time, is to travel on foot.
This rule is difficult to apply; it is frequently hard to
decide whether a single word, such as however, or a brief
phrase is or is not parenthetic. If the interruption to the flow
of the sentence is but slight, the commas may be safely
olnitted. But whether the interruption is slight or considerable, never omit one comma and leave the other. There is
no defense for such punctuation as
Marjorie's husband, Colonel Nelson paid us a visit yesterday.
or
My brother you will be pleased to hear, is now in perfect health.
Dates usually contain parenthetic words or figures. Punctuate as follows:
February to July, 1992

ELEMENTARY RULES OF USAGE

[3

April 6, 1986
Wednesday, November 14, 1990

Nate that it is customary to omit the comma in
6 April 1988

The last form is an excellent way to write a date; the figures
are separated by a word and are, for that reason, quickly
grasped.
A name or a title in direct address is parenthetic.

If, Sir, you refuse, I cannot predict what will happen.
Well, Susan, this is a fine mess you are in.

The abbreviations etc., i.e., and e.g., the abbreviations for
academic degrees, and titles that follow a name are parenthetic and should be punctuated accordingly.
Letters, packages, etc., should go here.
Horace Fulsome, Ph.D., presided.
Rachel Simonds, Attorney
The Reverend Harry Lang, S.J.

No comma, however, should separate a noun from a
restrictive term of identification.

Billy the Kid
The novelist Jane Austen
William the Conqueror
The poet Sappho
Although JunioJ: with its abbreviation Jr., has commonly
been regarded as parenthetic, logic suggests that it is, in
fact, restrictive and therefore not in need of a comma.
James Wright Jr.
Nonrestrictive relative clauses are parenthetic, as are
similar clauses introduced by conjunctions indicating time
or place. Commas are therefore needed. A nonrestrictive

4]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

clause is one that does not serve to identify or define the
antecedent noun.
The audience, which had at first been indifferent,
became more and more interested.
In 1769, when Napoleon was born, Corsica had but
recently been acquired by France.
Nether Stowey, where Coleridge wrote The Rime ofthe
Ancient Mariner, is a few miles from Bridgewater.

In these sentences, the clauses introduced by which,
when, and where are nonrestrictive; they do not limit or
define, they merely add something. In the first example, the
clause introduced by which does not serve to tell which of
several possible audiences is meant; the reader presumably
knows that already. The clause adds, parenthetically, a statement supplementing that in the main clause. Each of the
three sentences is a combination of two statements that
might have been made independently.
The audience was at first indifferent. Later it became
more and more interested.
Napoleon was born in 1769. At that time Corsica had
but recently been acquired by France.
Coleridge wrote The Rime ofthe Ancient Mariner at
Nether Stowey. Nether Stowey is a few miles from
Bridgewater.

Restrictive clauses, by contrast, are not parenthetic and
are not set off by commas. Thus,
People who live in glass houses shouldn't throw stones.

Here the clause introduced by who does serve to tell which
people are meant; the sentence, unlike the sentences above,
cannot be split into two independent statements. The same
principle of comma use applies to participial phrases and to
appositives.
People sitting in the rear couldn't hear. (restrictive)

Uncle Bert, being slightly deaf, moved forward. (nonrestrictive )

ELEMENTARY RULES OF USAGE

[5

My cousin Bob is a talented harpist. (restrictive)
OUf

oldest daughter, Mary, sings. (nonrestrictive)

When the main clause of a sentence is preceded by a
phrase or a subordinate clause, use a comma to set off these
elements.
Partly by hard fighting, partly by diplomatic skill, they
enlarged their dominions to the east and rose to royal rank
with the possession of Sicily.

4. Place a comma before a conjunction introducing
an independent clause.
The early records of the city have disappeared, and the
story of its first years can no longer be reconstructed.
The situation is perilous, but there is still one chance of
escape.

Two-part sentences of which the second member is
introduced by as (in the sense of Hbecause") ,for; or, nor, or
while (in the sense of Hand at the same time") likewise
require a comma before the conjunction.
If a dependent clause, or an introductory phrase requiring to be set off by a comma, precedes the second independent clause, no comma is needed after the conjunction.
The situation is perilous, but if we are prepared to act
promptly, there is still one chance of escape.

When the subject is the same for both clauses and is
expressed only once, a comma is useful if the connective
is but. When the connective is and~ the comma should be
omitted if the relation between the two statements is close
or immediate.
I have heard the arguments, but am still unconvinced.

He has had several years' experience and is thoroughly
competent.

5. Do not join independent clauses with a comma.
If two or more clauses grammatically complete and
not joined by a conjunction are to form a single com-

6)

iRE ELEMENiS OF Sl''iLE

pound sentence, the proper mark of punctuation is a
semicolon.
Mary Shelley's works are entertaining; they are full of
engaging ideas.
It is nearly half past five; we cannot reach town before

dark.
It is~ of course, equally correct to write each of these as
two sentences, replacing the semicolons with periods.
Mal)' Shelley's works are entertaining. They are full of
engaging ideas.
It is nearly half past five. We cannot reach town before

dark.
If a conjunction is inserted, the proper mark is a comma.
(Rule 4.)

Mary Shelley's works are entertaining, for they are full
of engaging ideas.

It is nearly half past five, and we cannot reach town
before dark.

A comparison of the three forms given above will show
clearly the advantage of the first. It is, at least in the examples given, better than the second form because it suggests
the close relationship between the tvvo statements in a way
that the second does not attempt, and better than the third
because it is briefer and therefore more forcible. Indeed,
this simple method ofindicating relationship between statements is one of the most useful devices ofcomposition. The
relationship, as above, is commonly one of cause and con-

sequence.
Note that if the second clause is preceded by an adverb,
such as accordingly, besides, then,.therefore, or thus, and not
by a conjunction, the semicolon is still required.
I had never been in the place before; besides, it was
dark as a tomb.

An exception to the semicolon rule is worth noting here.
A comma is preferable when the clauses are very short and

ELEMENTARY RULES OF USAGE

[7

alike in form, or when the tone of the sentence is easy and
conversational.
Man proposes, God disposes.
The gates swung apart, the bridge fell, the portcullis
was drawn up.
I hardly mew him, he was so changed.

Here today, gone tomorrow.

6. Do not break sentences in two.
In other words, do not use periods for commas.
I met them on a Cunard liner many years ago. Coming

home from Liverpool to New York.
She was an interesting talker. A woman who had traveled allover the world and lived in half a dozen countries.
In both these examples, the first period should be replaced by a comma and the follOwing word begun with a
small letter.
It is permissible to make an emphatic word or expression
serve the purpose of a sentence and to punctuate it accordingly:
Again and again he called out. No reply.
The writer must, however, be certain that the emphasis
is warranted, lest a clipped sentence seem merely a blunder in syntax or in punctuation. Generally speaking, the
place for broken sentences is in dialogue, when a character
happens to speak in a clipped or fragmentary way.
Rules 3, 4, 5, and 6 cover the most important prinCiples
that govern punctuation. They should be so thoroughly mastered that their application becomes second nature.

7. Use a colon after an independent clause to introduce a list of particulars, an appositive, an amplification, or an illustrative quotation.
A colon tells the reader that what follows is closely re-

lated to the preceding

clause. The colon has more effect

8]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

than the comma, less power to separate than the semicolon,
and more formality than the dash. It usually follows an independent clause and should not separate a verb from its
complement or a preposition from its object. The examples
in the lefthand column, below, are wrong; they should be
rewritten as in the righthand column.
Your dedicated whittIer
requires: a knife, a piece of
wood, and a back porch.

Your dedicated whittIer
requires three props: a
knife, a piece of wood, and

a back porch.
Understanding is that
penetrating quality of
knowledge that grows
from: theory, practice,
conviction, assertion, error, and humiliation.

Understanding is that
penetrating quality of
knowledge that grows
from theory, practice,
conviction, assertion, error, and humiliation.

Join two independent clauses with a colon if the second
interprets or amplifies the first.
But even so, there was a directness and dispatch about
animal burial: there was no stopover in the undertaker's
foul parlor, no wreath or spray.

A colon may introduce a quotation that supports or contributes to the preceding clause.
The squalor of the streets reminded her of a line from
Oscar Wilde: "We are all in the gutter, but some of us are
looking at the stars."

The colon also has certain functions of form: to follow the
salutation of a formal letter, to separate hour from minute
in a notation of time, and to separate the title of a work from
its subtitle or a Bible chapter from a verse.
Dear Mr. Montague:
departs at 10:48 P.M.

Practical Calligraphy: An Introduction to Italic Script

Nehemiah 11:7

ELEMENTARY RULES OF USAGE

[9

8. Use a dash to set offan abrupt break or interruption and to announce a long appositive or summary.
A dash is a mark ofseparation stronger than a comma, less
formal than a colon, and more relaxed than parentheses.

His first thought on getting out of bed-if he had any
thought at all-was to get back in again.
The rear axle began to make a noise-a grinding, chattering, teeth-gritting rasp.
The increasing reluctance of the sun to rise, the extra
nip in the breeze, the patter of shed leaves dropping-all
the evidences of fall drifting into winter were clearer each

day.
Use a dash only when a more common mark of punctuation seems inadequate.
Her father's suspicions
proved well- founded-it
was not Edward she cared
for-it was San Francisco.

Her father's suspicions
proved well-founded. It
was not Edward she cared
for, it was San Francisco.

Violence-the kind you
see on television-is not
honestly violent-there lies
its harm.

Violence, the kind you
see on television, is not
honestly violent. There lies
its harm.

9. The number of the subject determines the number of the verb.
Words that intervene between subject and verb do not
affect the number of the verb.
The bittersweet flavor of
youth-its trials, its joys, its
adventures, its challengesare not soon forgotten.

The bittersweet flavor of
youth-its trials, its joys, its
adventures, its challenges
-is not soon forgotten.

A common blunder is the use of a singular verb form in
a relative clause follOwing "one of ..." or a similar expression when the relative is the subject.
.

10]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

One of the ablest scientists who has attacked this
problem

One of the ablest scientists who have attacked this
problem

One of those people
who is never ready on
time

One of those people
who are never ready on
time
~

Use a singular verb form after each, either, everyone,
everybody, neither, nobody, someone.
Everybody thinks he has a unique sense of humor.
Although both clocks strike cheerfully, neither keeps
good time.

With none, use the singular verb when the word means
"no one" or "not one."
N one of us are perfect.

N one of us is perfect.

A plural verb is commonly used when none suggests more
than one thing or person.
N one are so fallible as those who are sure they're right.

A compound subject formed oftwo or more nouns joined
by and almost always requires a plural verb.
The walrus and the carpenter were walking close at
hand.

But certain compounds, often cliches, are so inseparable
they are considered a unit and so take a singular verb, as do
compound subjects qualified by each or every.
The long and the short of it is ...
Bread and butter was all she served.
Give and take is essential to a happy household.
Every window, picture, and mirror was smashed.

A Singular subject remains singular even if other nouns
are connected to it bywUh, as well as, in addition to, except,
together with, and no less than.
His speech as well as his manner is objectionable.

E L EM E N TA R Y R U L E S 0 F USA G E

[11

A linking verb agrees with the number of its subject.
What is wanted is a few more pairs of hands.
The trouble with truth is its many varieties.
Some nouns that appear to be plural are usually construed as singular and given a singular verb.
Politics is an art, not a science.

The Republican Headquarters is on this side ofthe tracks.
But
The general's quarters are across the river.

In these cases the writer must simply learn the idioms.
The contents of a book is singular. The contents of a jar may
be either singular or plural, depending on whafs in the jarjam or marbles.

10. Use the proper case of pronoun.
The personal pronouns, as weU as the pronoun who,
change form as they function as subject or object.
Will Jane or he be hired, do you think?
The culprit, it turned out, was he.
We heary eaters would rather walk than ride.

Who knocks?
Give this work to whoever looks idle.

In the last example, whoever is the subject of looks idle; the
object of the preposition to is the entire clause whoever
looks idle. When who introduces a subordinate clause, its
case depends on its function in that clause.
Virgil Soames is the
candidate whom we think
will win.

Virgil Soames is the candidate who we think win
win. [We think he will \Vin.)

Virgil Soames is the

Virgil Soames is the
candidate WhOlll we hope
to elect. [We hope to elect
him.]

candidate who we hope to

elect.

12]

THE E L E MEN T S 0 F STY L E

A pronoun in a comparison is nominative if it is the subject of a stated or understood verb.
Sandy writes better than I. (Than I write.)
In general, avoid "understood" verbs by supplying them.
I think Horace admires
jessica more than I.

I think Horace admires
Jessica more than I do.

Polly loves cake more
than me.

Polly loves cake more
than she loves me.

The objective case is correct in the follOwing examples.
The ranger offered Shirley and him some advice on
campsites.
They came to meet the Baldwins and us.
Let's talk it over between us, then, you and me.
Whom should I ask?
A group of us taxpayers protested.

Us in the last example is in apposition to taxpayers, the object
of the preposition of The wording, although grammatically
defensible, is rarely apt. "A group of us protested as taxpayers" is better, if not exactly equivalent.
Use the simple personal pronoun as a subject.
Blake and myself stayed
home.
Howard and yourself
brought the lunch, I
thought.

Blake and I stayed
home.
Howard and you
broughtthelunch,I
thought.

The possessive case of pronouns is used to show ownership. It has two forms: the adjectival modifier, your hat, and
the noun form, a hat of yours.
The dog has buried one of your gloves and Oile of mine
in the flower bed.
Gerunds usually require the possessive case.
Mother objected to our driving on the icy roads.

E L E MEN TAR Y R U L E S 0 F USA G E

[ 13

A present participle as a verbal, on the other hand, takes the
objective case.
They heard him singing in the shower.
The difference between a verbal participle and a gerund is
not always obvious, but note what is really said in each of
the following.
Do you mind me asking a question?

Do you mind my asking a question?
In the first sentence, the queried objection is to me, as opposed to other members of the group, asking a question. In
the second example, the issue is whether a question may be
asked at all.
11. A participial phrase at the beginning of a 8en-

tence must refer to the grammatical subject.
Walking slowly down the road, he saw a woman accompanied by two children.
The word walking refers to the subject of the sentence,
not to the woman. To make it refer to the woman, the writer
must recast the sentence.
He saw a woman, accompanied by two children, walking slowly down the road.

Participial phrases preceded by a conjunction or by a
preposition, nouns in apposition, adjectives, and adjective
phrases come under the same rule ifthey begin the sentence.
On arriving in Chicago,
his friends met him at the
station.
A soldier of proved
valor, they entrusted him
with the defense of the city.
Young and inexperienced, the task seemed
easy to me.

On arriving in Chicago,
he was met at the station
by his friends.
A soldier of proved
valor, he was entrusted
with the defense of the city.
Young and inexperi-

enced, I thought the task
easy.

14]

THE ELEM-ENTS OF STYLE

Without a friend to
counsel him, the temptalion proved irresistible.

Without a friend to
counsel him, he found the
temptation irresistible.

Sentences violating Rule 11 are often ludicrous:
Being in a dilapidated condition, I was able to buy the
house very cheap.
Wondering irresolutely what to do next, the clock
struck twelve.

II
Elementary Principles
of Composition
12. Choose a suitable design and hold to it.
A basic structural design underlies every kind ofwriting.
Writers will in part follow this design, in part deviate from
it, according to their skills, their needs, and the unexpected
events that accompany the act of composition. Writing, to
be effective, must follow closely the thoughts of the writer,
but not necessarily in the order in which those thoughts
occur. This calls for a scheme of procedure. In some cases,
the best design is no design, as with a love letter, which is
simply an outpouring, or with a casual essay, which is a
ramble. But in most cases, planning must be a deliberate
prelude to writing. The first principle ofcomposition, therefore, is to foresee or determine the shape ofwhat is to come
and pursue that shape.
A sonnet is built on a fourteen-line frame, each line containing five feet. Hence, sonneteers know exactly where
they are headed, although they may not know how to get
there. Most forms of composition are less clearly defined,
more flexible, but all have skeletons to which the writer will
bring the flesh and the blood. The more clearly the writer
perceives the shape, the better are the chances of success.

13. Make the paragraph the unit ofcomposition.
The paragraph is a convenient unit; it senres all forms of
literary work. As long as it holds together, a paragraph may
15

16]

THE E L E MEN T S 0 F STY L E

be of any length-a single, short sentence or a passage of
great duration.
If the subject on which you are writing is ofslight extent,
or if you intend to treat it briefly, there may be no need to
divide it into topics. Thus, a brief description, a brief book
review, a brief account of a single incident, a narrative merely outlining an action, the setting forth of a single idea-any
one of these is best written in a single paragraph. After the
paragraph has been written, examine it to see whether division will improve it.
Ordinarily, however, a subject requires division into topics, each of which should be dealt with in a paragraph. The
object of treating each topic in a paragraph by itself is, of
course, to aid the reader. The beginning of each paragraph
is a signal that a new step in the development of the subject
has been reached.
As a rule, single sentences should not be written or
printed as paragraphs. An exception may be made of sentences of transition, indicating the relation between the
parts of an exposition or argument
In dialogue, each speech, even if only a single word, is
usually a paragraph by itself; that is, a new paragraph begins
with each change of speaker. The application of this rule
when dialogue and narrative are combined is best learned
from examples in well-edited works of fiction. Sometimes
a writer, seeking to create an effect of rapid talk or for some
other reason, will elect not to set off each speech in a separate paragraph and instead will run speeches together.
The common practice, however, and the one that serves
best in lTIOSt instances, is to give each speech a paragraph
of its own.
As a rule, begin each paragraph either with a sentence
that suggests the topic or with a sentence that helps the
transition. Ifa paragraph forms part ofa larger composition,
its relation to what precedes, or its function as a part of the
whole, may need to be expressed. This can sometimes be
done by a mere word or phrase (again, therefore, for the
same reason) in the first sentence. Sometimes, however, it

PRINCIPLES OF COMPOSITION

[17

is expedient to get into the topic slowly, by way ofa sentence
or two of introduction or transition.
In narration and description, the paragraph sometimes
begins with a concise, comprehensive statement serving to
hold together the details that follow.
The breeze served us admirably.
The campaign opened with a series of reverses.
The next ten or twelve pages were filled with a curious
set of entries.
But when this device, or any device, is too often used, it
becomes a mannerism. More commonly, the opening sentence Simply indicates by its subject the direction the paragraph is to take.
At length I thought I might return toward the stockade.

He picked up the heavy lamp from the table and began
to explore.
Another flight of steps, and they emerged on the roof.
In animated narrative, the paragraphs are likely to be
short and without any semblance of a topic sentence, the
writer rushing headlong, event follOwing event in rapid succession. The break between such paragraphs merely serves
the purpose of a rhetorical pause, thrOwing into prominence some detail of the action.
In general, remember that paragraphing calls for a good
eye as well as a logical mind. Enormous blocks of print look
formidable to readers, who are often reluctant to tackle
them. Therefore, breaking long paragraphs in two, even if
it is not necessary to do so for sense, meaning, or lo~ical
development, is often a visual help. But remember, too, that
firing off many short paragraphs in quick succession can be
distracting. Paragraph breaks used only for show read like
the writing of commerce or of display advertising. Moderation and a sense of order should be the main considerations in paragraphing.

18]

TH E E LE M E NTS OF STYLE

14. Use the active voice.
The active voice is usually more direct and vigorous than
the passive:
I shall always remember my first visit to Boston.

This is much better than

My first visit to Boston will always be remembered by
me.
The latter sentence is less direct, less bold, and less concise. If the writer tries to make it more concise by omitting
""by me,"

My first visit to Boston will always be remembered,
it becomes indefinite: is it the writer or some undisclosed
person or the world at large that will always remember this
visit?
This rule does not, of course, mean that the writer should
entirely discard the passive voice, which is frequently convenient and sometimes necessary.
The dramatists of the Restoration are little esteemed
today.
Modem readers have little esteem for the dramatists of
the Restoration.

The first would be the preferred form in a paragraph on the
dramatists of the Restoration, the second in a paragraph on
the tastes of modem readers. The need to make a particular word the subject of the sentence will often, as in these
examples, determine which voice is to be used.
The habitual use of the active voice, however, makes for
forcible writing. This is true not only in narrative concerned
principally with action but in writing of any kind. Many a
tame sentence of description or exposition can be made
lively and emphatiC by substituting a transitive in the active
voice for some such perfunctory expression as there is or
could be heard.

P R INC I P L E S 0 F COM PO SIT ION

[ 19

There were a great
number of dead leaves
lying on the ground.

Dead leaves covered the
ground.

At dawn the crowing of
a rooster could be heard.

The cock's crow came
with dawn.

The reason he left college was that his health
became impaired.
It was not long before
she was very sorry that she
had said what she had.

F ailing health compelled him to leave college.
She soon repented her
words.

Note, in the examples above, that when a sentence is
made stronger, it usually becomes shorter. Thus, brevity is
a by-product of vigor.

15. Put statements in positive form.
Make definite assertions. Avoid tame, colorless, hesitating, noncommittal language. Use the word not as a means
of denial or in antithesis, never as a means of evasion.

He was not very often
on time.

He usually came late.

She did not think that
studying Latin was a sensible way to use one's time.

She thought the study of
Latin a waste of time.

The Taming ofthe
Shrew is rather weak in
spots. Shakespeare does
not portray Katharine as a
very admirable character,
nor does Bianca remain
long in memory as an
important character in
Shakespeare's works.

The women in The
Taming of the Shrew are
unattractive. Katharine
is disagreeable, Bianca
insignificant.

The last example, before correction, is indefinite as well
as negative. The corrected version, consequently, is simply
a guess at the writer's intention.

20]

THE E L E MEN T S 0 F STY L E

All three examples show the weakness inherent in the
word not. Consciously or unconsciously, the reader is dissatisfied \\lith being told only what is not; the reader wishes
to be told what is. Hence, as a rule, it is better to express
even a negative in positive form.
not honest
dishonest
not important
trifling
did not remember
forgot
did not pay any attention to
ignored
did not have much confidence in
distrusted
Placing negative and positive in opposition makes for a
stronger structure.
Not charity, but simple justice.
Not that I loved Caesar less, but that I loved Rome more.
Ask not what your country can do for you-ask what
you can do for your country.'
Negative words other than not are usually strong.
Her loveliness I never knew / Until she smiled on me.
Statements qualified with unnecessary auxiliaries or conditionals sound irresolute.
If you would let us know
the time of your arrival, we
would be happy to arrange
your transportation from
the airport.
Applicants can make a
good impression by being
neat and punctual.
Plath may be ranked
among those modem poets
who died young.

If you will let us know
the time of your arrival, we
shall be happy to arrange
your transportation from
the airport.
Applicants will make a
good impression if they are
neat and punctual.
Plath was one of those
modem poets who died
young.

If your every sentence admits a doubt, your writing will lack
authOrity. Save the auxiliaries would, should, could, may,
might, and can for situations involving real uncertainty.

P R INC I P L E SOl' CO M PO SIT ION

[21

16. Use definite, specific, concrete language.
Prefer the specific to the general, the definite to the
vague, the concrete to the abstract.
A period of unfavorable

weather set in.
He showed satisfaction
as he took possession of his
well-earned reward.

It rained every day for a
week.

He grinned as he pocketed the coin.

If those who have studied the art ofwriting are in accord
on anyone point, it is this: the surest way to arouse and hold
the reader's attention is by being specific, definite, and concrete. The greatest writers-Homer, Dante, Shakespeareare effective largely because they deal in particulars and
report the details that matter. Their words call up pictures.
Jean Stafford, to cite a more Illodem author, demonstrates in her short story "In the Zoo" how prose is made
vivid by the use of words that evoke images and sensations:
... Daisy and I in time found asylum in a small
menagerie down by the railroad tracks. It belonged to
a gentle alcoholic ne'er-do-well, who did nothing all day
long but drink bathtub gin in rickeys and play solitaire
and smile to himself and talk to his animals. He had a

little, stunted red vixen and a deodorized skunk, a parrot
from Tahiti that spoke Parisian French, a woebegone
coyote, and nxTo capuchin monkeys, so serious and
humar-ized, so small and sr..d and sweet, and so religiouslooking with their tonsured heads that it was impossible
not to think their gibberish was really an ordered language
with a grammar that someday some philologist would
understand.
Gran knew about our visits to Mr. Murphy and she
did not object, for it gave her keen pleasure to excoriate
him when we came home. His vice was not a matter of
guesswork; it was an established fact that he was half-seas
over from dawn till midnight. 'With the black Irish," said
Gran, "the taste for drink is taken in with the mother's

22]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

milk and is never mastered. Oh, I know all about those
promises to join the temperance movement and not to
touch another drop. The way to Hell is paved with good
intentions." *

If the experiences of Walter Mitty, of Molly Bloom, of
Rabbit Angstrom have seemed for the moment real to
countless readers, if in reading Faulkner we have almost
the sense of inhabiting Yoknapatawpha County during
the decline of the South, it is because the details used are
definite, the terms concrete. It is not that every detail is
given-that would be impossible, as well as to no purposebut that all the significant details are given, and with such
accuracy and vigor that readers, in imagination, can project
themselves into the scene.
In exposition and in argument, the writer must likewise
never lose hold of the concrete; and even when dealing
with general principles, the writer must furnish particular
instances of their application.
In his Philosophy of Style, Herbert Spencer gives two
sentences to illustrate how the vague and general can be
turned into the vivid and particular:
In proportion as the
manners, customs, and
amusements of a nation are
cruel and barbarous, the
regulations of its penal
code will be severe.

In proportion as men
delight in battles, bullfights, and combats of gladiators, will they punish by
hanging, burning, and the
rack.

To show what happens when strong writing is deprived
of its vigor, George Orwell once took a passage from the
*Excerpt from «In the Zoo" from Bad Characters by Jean Stafford.
Copyright © 1964 by Jean Stafford. Copyright renewed © 1992 by
Nora Cosgrove. Reprinted by permission of Farrar, Straus & Giroux,
Inc. Also copyright © 1969 by Jean Stafford; reprinted by permission
of Curtis Brown, Ltd.

PRINCIPLES OF COMPOSITION

[23

Bible and drained it of its blood. On the left, below, is
Orwell's translation; on the right, the verse from Ecclesiastes (King James Version).
Objective consideration
of contemporary phenome-

I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race

na compels the conclusion

is not to the swift, nor the

that success or failure in
competitive activities exhibits no tendency to be
commensurate with innate
capacity, but that a considerable element of the unpredictable must inevitably
be taken into account.

battle to the strong, neither
yet bread to the wise, nor
yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to
men of skill; but time and
chance happeneth to them

all.

17. Omit needless words.
Vigorous writing is concise. A sentence should contain no
unnecessary words, a paragraph no unnecessary sentences,
for the same reason that a drawing should have no unnecessary lines and a machine no unnecessary parts. This requires not that the writer make all sentences short, or avoid
all detail and treat subjects only in outline, but that every
word tell.
Many expressions in common use violate this principle.
the question as to

whether
there is no doubt but

whether (the question

whether)
no doubt (doubtless)

that
used for fuel purposes

used for fuel

he is a man who
in a hasty manner
this is a subject that

he

Her story is a strange
one.

the reason why is that

hastily
this subject
Her story is strange.
because

24]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

The fact that is an especially debilitating expression. It
should be revised out of every sentence in \vhich it occurs.
owing to the fact that
in spite of the fact that
call your attention to the
fact that
I was unaware of the
fact that
the fact that he had not
succeeded
the fact that I had arrived

since (because)
though (although)
remind you (notify you)
I was unaware that (did
not know)
his failure

my arrival

..

See also the words case, character, nature in Chapter IV
Who is, which was, and the like are often superfluous.
His cousin, who is a
member of the same firm
Trafalgar, which was
N elson's last battle

His cousin. a member of
the same finn
Trafalgar, Nelson's last
battle

As the active voice is more concise than the passive, and
a positive statement more concise than a negative one,
many of the examples given under Rules 14 and 15 illustrate
this rule as well.
A common way to fall into wordiness is to present a
single complex idea, step by step, in a series of sentences
that might to advantage be combined into one.
Macbeth was very ambitious. This led him to wish
to become king of Scotland. The witches told him
that this wish of his would
come true. The king of
Scotland at this time was
Duncan. Encouraged by
his wife, Macbeth murdered Duncan. He was
thus enabled to succeed
Duncan as king. (51 words)

Encouraged by his wife,
Macbeth achieved his
ambition and realized the
prediction of the witches
by murdering Duncan and
becoming king of Scotland
in his place. (26 words)

PRINCIPLES OF COMPOSITION

[25

18. Avoid a succession of loose sentences.
This rule refers especially to loose sentences of a particular type: those consisting of two clauses, the second
introduced by a conjunction or relative. A writer may err
by making sentences too compact and periodic. An occasional loose sentence prevents the style from becoming
too formal and gives the reader a certain relief. Consequently, loose sentences are common in easy, unstudied
writing. The danger is that there may be too many of them.
An unskilled writer will sometimes construct a whole
paragraph of sentences of this kind, using as connectives
and, but, and, less frequently, who, which, when, where,
and while, these last in nonrestrictive senses. (See Rule 3.)
The third concert of the subscription series was given last
evening, and a large audience was in attendance. Mr. Edward
Appleton was the soloist, and the Boston Symphony Orchestra furnished the instrumental music. The former showed
himself to be an artist of the first rank, while the latter
proved itself fully deserving of its high reputation. The interest aroused by the series has been vel)' gratifying to the Committee, and it is planned to give a similar series annually
hereafter. The fourth concert will be given on Tuesday, May
10, when an equally attractive program will be presented.
Apart from its triteness and emptiness, the paragraph
above is bad because of the structure of its sentences, with
their mechanical sYJnmetry and singsong. Compare these
sentences from the chapter '''What I Believe" in E. M.
Forster's Two Cheers for Derrwcracy:
I believe in aristocracy, though-if that is the right

word, and if a democrat may use it. Not an aristocracy of
power, based upon rank and influence, but an aristocracy
of the sensitive, the considerate and the plucky. Its members are to be found in all nations and classes, and all
through the ages, and there is a secret understanding
between them when they meet. They represent the true
human tradition, the one permanent victory of our queer
race over cruelty and chaos. Thousands of them perish in
obSCUrity, a few are great names. They are sensitive for

26]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

others as well as for themselves, they are considerate
without being fussy, their pluck is not swankiness but the
power to endure, and they can take a joke. *
A writer who has written a series ofloose sentences should
recast enough of them to remove the monotony, replacing
them with simple sentences, sentences of two clauses joined
by a semicolon, periodic sentences of two clauses, or sentences (loose or periodic) of three clauses--whichever best
represent the real relations of the thought.

19. Express coordinate ideas in similar fonn.
This principle, that of parallel constroction, requires that
expressions similar in content and function be ounvardly
similar. The likeness of fonn enables the reader to recognize
more readily the likeness of content and function. The familiar Beatitudes exemplify the virtue of parallel construction.
Blessed ate the poor in spirit: for theirs is the kingdom
of heaven.
Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall be comforted.
Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.
Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst after

righteousness: for they shall be filled.
The unskilled writer often violates this principle) mistakenly believing in the value ofconstantly varying the form
of expression. When repeating a statement to emphasize it,
the writer may need to vary its form. Otherwise. the writer
should follow the principle of parallel construction.

Formerly, science was
taught by the textbook
method, while now the laboratory method is employed.

FonnerIy, science \vas

taught by the textbook
method; now it is taught by
the laboratory method.

The lefthand version gives the impression that the writer
is undecided or timid, apparently unable or afraid to choose
*Excerpt from ''What I Believe" in Two Cheers for Democracy,
copyright 1939 and renewed 1967 by E. M. Forster, reprinted by permission ofHarcourt, Inc. Also, by permission ofThe Provost and Scholars of King's College, Cambridge, and The Society of Authors as the
literary representatives of the E. M. Forster Estate.

P R INC I P L E S 0 F COM PO SIT ION

[27

one fonn of expression and hold to it. The righthand version shows that the writer has at least made a choice and
abided by it.
By this principle, an article or a preposition applying to
all the members of a series must either be used only before
the first tenn or else be repeated before each term.
the French, the Italians,
Spanish, and Portuguese
in spring, summer, or in
winter

the French, the Italians,
the Spanish, and the Portuguese
in spring, summer, or
"Winter (in spring, in summer, or in winter)

Some words require a particular preposition in certain
idiomatic uses. When such words are joined in a compound
construction, all the appropriate prepositions must be included, unless they are the same.
His speech was marked
by disagreement and scorn
for his opponent's position.

His speech was marked
by disagreement with and
scorn for his opponent's
position.

Correlative expressions (both, and; not, but; not only, but
also; either, or;first, second, third; and the like) should be followed by the same grammatical construction. Manyviolations
of this rule can be corrected by rearranging the sentence.

It was both a long ceremony and very tedious.
A time not for words but
action.
Either you must grant
his request or incur his ill
will.

My objections are, first,

The ceremony was both

long and tedious.
A time not for words but
for action.
You must either grant
his request or incur his ill

will.
My objections are, first,

the injustice of the mea-

that the measure is unjust;

sure; second, that it is

second, that it is unconstitutional.

unconstitutional.

28]

THE E L E MEN T S 0 F STY L E

It may be asked, what if you need to express a rather
large number of similar ideas-say, twenty? ~fust you \\Trite
twenty consecutive sentences of the same pattern? On
closer examination, you will probably find that the difficulty is imaginary-that these twenty ideas can be classified in groups, and that you need apply the principle only
within each group. Otherwise, it is best to a\'oid the difficulty by putting statements in the fonn of a table.

20. Keep related words together.
The position of the words in a sentence is the principal
means of showing their relationship. Confusion and ambiguity result when words are badly placed. The writer must,
therefore, bring together the words and groups of words
that are related in thought and keep apart those that are not
so related.
He noticed a large stain
right in the center of the

He noticed a large stain
in the rug that was right in
the center.

rug.

You can call your mother
in London and tell her all
about George's taking
you out to dinner for just
two dollars.

For just two dollars you
can call your mother in
London and tell her all
about George's taking you
out to dinner.

New York's first commercial human-sperm bank
opened Friday with semen
samples from eighteen
men frozen in a stainless
steel tank.

New York's first commercial human-sperm
bank opened Friday when
semen samples were taken
from eighteen men. The
samples were then frozen
and stored in a stainless
steel tank.

In the lefthand version of the first example, the reader
has no way of knowing whet~1er the stain was in the center
of the rug or the rug was in the center of the room. In the
lefthand version of the second example, the reader may well

P R INC I P L E S 0 F COM P 0 SIT ION

[ 29

wonder which cost two dollars-the phone call or the dinner. In the lefthand version of the third example, the reader~s heart goes out to those eighteen poor fellows frozen in
a steel tank.
The subject of a sentence and the prinCipal verb should
not, as a rule, be separated by a phrase or clause that can be
transferred to the beginning.
Toni Morrison, in
Beloved~ writes about characters who have escaped
from slavery but are
haunted by its heritage.
A dog, if you fail to
discipline him, becomes
a household pest.

In Beloved, Toni Morrison writes about characters
who have escaped from
slavery but are haunted by
its heritage.
Unless disciplined, a dog
becomes a household pest.

Interposing a phrase or a clause, as in the lefthand examples above, interrupts the flow of the main clause. This
interruption, however, is not usually bothersome when the
flow is checked only by a relative clause or by an expression
in apposition. Sometimes, in periodic sentences, the interruption is a deliberate device for creating suspense. (See
examples under Rule 22.)
The relative pronoun should come, in most instances,
immediately after its antecedent.
.
There was a stir in the
audience that suggested
disapproval.
He wrote three articles
about his adventures in
Spain, which were published in Harper's Magazine.
This is a portrait of Benjamin Harrison, who became President in 1889.
He was the grandson of
William Henry Harrison.

A stir that suggested
disapproval swept the
audience.
He published three articles in Harper~s Magazine
about his adventures in
Spain.
This is a portrait of Benjamin Harrison, grandson
of William Henry Harrison,
who became President in
1889.

30]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

If the antecedent consists of a group of words, the relative comes at the end of the group, unless this would cause
ambiguity.
The Superintendent of the Chicago Division, who
No ambiguity results from the above. But
A proposal to amend the Sherman Act, which has been

variously judged

leaves the reader wondering whether it is the proposal or
the Act that has been variously judged. The relative clause
must be moved fOIWard, to read, "A proposal, which has
been variously judged, to amend the Sherman Act. ..."
Similarly
The grandson of William
Henry Harrison, who ,

William Henrv Harrison's grandson, Benjamin
Harrison, who
/

A noun in apposition may come between antecedent and
relative, because in such a combination no real ambiguity
can arise.
The Duke of York, his brother, who was regarded with
hostility by the Whigs

Modifiers should come, if possible, next to the words they
modifY. If several expressions modify the same word, they
should be arranged so that no wrong relation is suggested.

All the members were
not present.

Not all the members
were present.

She only found two
mistakes.

She found only two
mistakes.

The director said he
hoped all members would
give generously to the
Fund at a meeting of the
committee yesterday.

At a meeting of the
committee yesterday, the
director said he hoped all
members would give generously to the Fund.

P R INC I P L E S 0 F COM P 0 SIT ION

Major R. E. Joyce will
give a lecture on Tuesday
evening in Bailey Hall, to
which the public is invited
on «My Experiences in
Mesopotamia" at 8:00 P.M.

[ 31

On Tuesday evening at
eight, Major R. E. Joyce
will give a lecture in Bailey
Hall on "My Experiences
in Mesopotamia." The public is invited.

N ate, in the last lefthand example, how swiftly meaning departs when words are wrongly juxtaposed.

21. In summaries, keep to one tense.
In summarizing the action of a drama, use the present
tense. In summarizing a poem, story, or novel, also use the
present, though you may use the past if it seems more natural to do so. If the summary is in the present tense, antecedent action should be expressed by the perfect; if in the .
past, by the past perfect.
.
Chance prevents Friar John from delivering Friar
Lawrence's letter to Romeo. Meanwhile, owing to her
father's arbitrary change of the day set for her wedding,
Juliet has been compelled to drink the potion on Tuesday
night, with the result that Balthasar informs Romeo of her
supposed death before Friar Lawrence learns of the nondelivery of the letter.

But whichever tense is used in the summary, a past
tense in indirect discourse or in indirect question remains
unchanged.
'
The Friar confesses that it was he who married them.

Apart from the exceptions noted, the writer should use the
same tense throughout. Shifting from one tense to another
gives the appearance of uncertainty and irresolution.
In presenting the statements or the thought of someone
else, as in summarizing an essay or reporting a speech, do
not overwork such expressions as "he said," "she stated,"
"the speaker added," "the speaker then went on to say," «the
author also thinks." Indicate clearly at the outset, once for

32]

THE E L E MEN T S 0 F STY L E

all, that what follows is summary, and then waste no words
in repeating the notification.
In notebooks, in newspapers, in handbooks of literature,
summaries of one kind or another may be indispensable,
and for children in primary schools retelling a story in their
own words is a useful exercise. But in the criticism or interpretation of literature, be careful to avoid dropping into
summary. It may be necessary to devote one or hvo sentences to indicating the subject, or the opening situation, of
the work being discussed, or to cite numerous details to
illustrate its qualities. But you should aim at writing an
orderly discussion supported by evidence, not a sUlnlnary
with occasional comment. Similarly, if the scope of the discussion includes a number ofworks, as a rule it is better not
to take them up singly in chronological order but to aim
from the beginning at establishing general conclusions.
22. Place the emphatic words of a sentence at the

end.
The proper place in the sentence for the word or group
of words that the writer desires to make most prominent is
usually the end.
Humanity has hardly
advanced in fortitude since
that time, though it has
advanced in many other
ways.
This steel is principally
used for making razors,
because of its hardness.

Since that time, humanity has advanced in many
ways, but it has hardly
advanced in fortitude.
Because of its hardness,
this steel is used principally
for making razors.

The word or group of words entitled to this position of
prominence is usually the logical predicate-that is, the
new element in the sentence, as it is in the second example.
The effectiveness of the periodic sentence arises from
the prominence it gives to the main statement.
Four centuries ago, Christopher Columbus, one of the
Italian mariners whom the decline of their own republics

PRINCIPLES OF COMPOSITION

[33

had put at the service of the world and of adventure, seeking for Spain a westward passage to the Indies to offset
the achievement of Portuguese discoverers, lighted on
America.
With these hopes and in this belief I would urge you,
laying aside all hindrance, thrusting away all private aims,

to devote yourself unswervingly and unflinchingly to the
vigorous and successful prosecution of this war.

The other prominent position in the sentence is the
beginning. Any element in the sentence other than the subject becomes emphatic when placed first.
Deceit or treachery she could never forgive.
Vast and rude, fretted by the action of nearly three
thousand years, the fragments of this architecture may
often seem, at first sight, like works of nature.
Home is the sailor.

A subject coming first in its sentence may be emphatic,
but hardly by its position alone. In the sentence
Great kings worshiped at his shrine

the emphasis upon kings arises largely from its meaning and
from the context. To receive speCial emphasis, the subject
of a sentence must take the position of the predicate.
Through the middle of the valley flowed a winding
stream.

The principle that the proper place for what is to be
made most prominent is the end applies equally to the
words of a sentence, to the sentences of a paragraph, and to
the paragraphs of a composition.

III
A Few Matters
ofForm
Colloquialisms.

If you use a colloquialism or a slang
word or phrase, simply use it; do not dra\\' attention to it by
enclosing it in quotation marks. To do so is to put on airs, as
though you were inviting the reader to join you in a select
society of those who know better.

Exclamations. Do not attempt to emphasize simple
statements by using a mark of exclaluation.
It was a wonderful show!

It was a \\'onderfuJ show.

The exclamation mark is to be reserved for use after true
exclamations or commands.
What a wonderful show!

Haltt

Headings.

If a manuscript is to be submitted for publication, leave plenty of space at the top of page 1. The editor will need this space to Mite directions to the compositor.
Place the heading, or title, at least a fourth of the \\'ay down
the page. Leave a blank line, or its equivalent in space, after
the heading. On succeeding pages, begin near the top, but
not so near as to give a crowded appearance. Omit the period after a title or heading. A question mark or an exclamation point may be used if the heading calls for it.

Hyphen.

When two or more words are combined to
form a compound adjective, a hyphen is usually required.
34

A FEW MATTERS OF FORM

[35

"He belonged to the leisure class and enjoyed leisure-class
pursuits." "She entered her boat in the round-the-island
race. "
Do not use a hyphen between words that can better be
written as one word: water-fowl, waterfowl. Common sense
will aid you in the decision, but a dictionary is more reliable.
The steady evolution of the language seems to favor union:
two words eventually become one, usually after a period of
hyphenation.
bed chamber
wild life
bell boy

bed-chamber
wild-life
bell-boy

bedchamber
wildlife
bellboy

The hyphen can play tricks on the unwary, as it did in
Chattanooga when two newspapers merged-the News
and the Free Press. Someone introduced a hyphen into the
merger, and the paper became The Chattanooga NewsFree Press, which sounds as though the paper were newsfree, or devoid of news. Obviously, we ask too much of a
hyphen when we ask it to cast its spell over words it does
not adjoin.

Margins.

Keep righthand and lefthand margins roughly the same width. Exception: If a great deal of annotating
or editing is anticipated, the lefthand margin shouldpe
roomy enough to accommodate this work.

Numerals.

Do not spell out dates or other serial numbers. Write them in figures or in Roman notation, as appropriate.
August 9, 1988
Rule 3

Part XII

352d Infantry

Exception: When they occur in dialogue, most dates and
numbers are best spelled out.
"1 arrived home on August ninth."
«In the year 1990, I turned twenty-one.'~
"Read Chapter Twelve."

36]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

Parentheses.

A sentence containing an expression in
parentheses is punctuated outside the last mark of parenthesis exactly as if the parenthetical expression were absent.
The expression within the marks is punctuated as if it stood
by itself, except that the final stop is omitted unless it is a
question mark or an exclamation point.
I went to her house yesterday (my third attempt to see
her), but she had left town.
He declares (and why should we doubt his good faith?)
that he is now certain of success.

(When a wholly detached expression or sentence is parenthesized, the final stop comes before the last mark of
parenthesis. )

Quotations.

Formal quotations cited as documentary
evidence are introduced by a colon and enclosed in quotation marks.
The United States Coast Pilot has this to say of the
place: "Bracy Cove, 0.5 mile eastward of Bear Island, is
exposed to southeast winds, has a rocky and uneven bottom, and is unfit for anchorage."

A quotation grammatically in apposition or the direct
object of a verb is preceded by a comma and enclosed in
quotation marks.
I am reminded of the advice of my neighbor, "Never
worry about your heart till it stops beating."

Mark Twain says, <CA classic is something that everybody wants to have read and nobody wants to read."

When a quotation is followed by an attributive phrase,
the comma is enclosed within the quotation marks.

"I can't attend," she said.
Typographical usage dictates that the comma be Inside the
marks, though logically it often seems not to belong there.
"The Fish," "Poetry," and "The Monkeys" are in
Marianne Moore's Selected Poems.

A FEW MATTERS OF FORM

[37

When quotations of an entire line, or more, of either
verse or prose are to be distinguished typographically from
text matter, as are the quotations in this book, begin on a
fresh line and indent. Quotation marks should not be used
unless they appear in the original, as in dialogue.
Wordsworth's enthusiasm for the French Revolution
was at first unbounded:
Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive,
But to be young was very heaven!
Quotations introduced by that are indirect discourse
and not enclosed in quotation marks.
Keats declares that beauty is truth, truth beauty.
Dickinson states that a coffin is a small domain.
Proverbial expressions and familiar phrases of literary
origin require no quotation marks.
These are the times that try men's souls.
He lives far from the madding crowd.

References.

In scholarly work requiring exact refer-

ences, abbreviate titles.that occur frequently, giving the full
forms in an alphabetical list at the end. As a general practice, give the references in parentheses or in footnotes, not
in the body of the sentence. Omit the words act, scene, line,
book, volume, page, except when referring to only one of
them. Punctuate as indicated below.
in the second scene of
the third act

in III.ii (Better still, simply insert IIIji in parentheses at the proper place in
the sentence.)

After the killing of Polanius, Hamlet is placed under
guard (Iv.ii.14).
2 Samuel i: 17-27

Othello I1.iii. 264-267, III.ili.155--161

38]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

Syllabication.

When a word must be divided at the
end of a line, consult a dictionary to learn the syllables between which division should be made. The student will do
well to examine the syllable division in a number of pages
of any carefully printed book.

Titles.

For the titles of literary works, scholarly usage
prefers italics with capitalized initials. The usage of editors
and publishers varies, some using italics with capitalized initials, others using Roman with capitalized initials and with
or without quotation marks. Use italics (indicated in manuscript by underscoring) except in writing for a periodical
that follows a different practice. Omit initial A or The from
titles when you place the possessive before them#

A Tale afTwo Cities; Dickens's Tale afTwo Cities.
The Age of Innocence; Wharton's Age of Innocence.

IV
Words and Expressions
Commonly Misused
of the words and expressions listed here are not so
much bad English as bad style, the commonplaces of careless writing. As illustrated under Feature, the proper correction is likely to be not the replacement of one word or
set of words by another but the replacement of vague generality by definite statement.
The shape of our language is not rigid; in questions of
usage we have no lawgiver whose word is final. Students
whose curiosity is aroused by the interpretations that follow,
or whose doubts are raised, will wish to pursue their investigations further. Books useful in such pursuits are Merriam Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, Tenth Edition; The
American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language,
Third Edition; Webster's Third New International Dictionary; The New Fowler's Modem English Usage, Third Edition, edited by R. W Burchfield; Modem American Usage:
A Guide by Wilson Follett and Erik Wensberg; and The
Careful Writer by Theodore M. Bernstein.
MANY

Aggravate. Irritate. The first means "to add to" an
already troublesome or vexing matter or condition. The second means "to vex" or "to annoy" or "to chafe."
All right. Idiomatic in familiar speech as a detached
phrase in the sense "Agreed," or "Go ahead," or ~~O.K."
Properly written as two words--all tight.
39

40]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

Allude. Do not confuse with elude. You allude to a
book; you elude a pursuer. Note, too, that allude is not s:nonymous with refer. An allusion is an indirect mention, a
reference is a specific one.

Allusion.

Easily confused with illusion. The first
means "an indirect reference"; the second means an unreal image" or "a false impression."
u

Alternate. Alternative. The words are not always
interchangeable as nouns or adjectives. The first means
every other one in a series; the second, one of hVQ pOSSibilities. As the other one of a series of hvo, an alternate may
stand for '"a substitute," but an alternative, although used in
a similar sense, connotes a matter of choice that is never
present with alternate.
As the flooded road left them no alternative, they took
the alternate route.
-'

Among. Between. When more than two things or persons are involved, among is usually called for: uThe money
was divided among the four players." When, however, more
than two are involved but each is considered individually,
between is preferred: "an agreement between the six heirs."

And/or.

A device, or shortcut, that damages a sentence
and often leads to confusion or ambiguity.
First of all, would an
honor system successfully
cut down on the amount of
stealing and/or cheating?

Anticipate.

First of all, would an
honor system reduce the
incidence of stealing or
cheating or both?

Use expect in the sense of simple expec-

tation.
I anticipated that he
would look older.

My brother anticipated
the upturn in the market.

I expected that he would
look older.

My brother expected the
upturn in the market.

MIS USE D W 0 R D SAN D E X PRE S S ION S

[41

In the second example, the word anticipated is ambiguous.
I t could mean simply that the brother believed the upturn
would occur, or it could mean that he acted in advance of
the expected upturn-by buying stock, perhaps.

Anybody.

In the sense of "any person," not to be \\TItten as two words. Any body means "any corpse," or "any

human form," or "any group." The rule holds equally for
everybody, nobody, and somebody.

Anyone. In the sense of "anybody," written as one
word. Anyone means "any single person" or "any single
thing."
As good or better than. Expressions of this type
should be corrected by rearranging the sentences.
My opinion is as good or

as his, or better (if not
better).

better than his.

As to whether.
As yet.

My opinion is as good

Whether is sufficient.

Yet nearly always is as good, if not better.

N a agreement has been
reached as yet.

N a agreement has yet
been reached.

The chief exception is at the beginning of a sentence,
where yet means something different.
Yet (or despite everything) he has not succeeded.
As yet (or so far) he has not succeeded.

Being.

Not appropriate after regard . .. as.

He is regarded as being
the best dancer in the club.

But.

He is regarded as the
best dancer in the club.

Unnecessary after doubt and help.

I have no doubt but that

He could not help but
see that

I have no doubt that

He could not help seeing that

42]

THE E L E MEN T S 0 F STY L E

The too-frequent use of but as a conjunction leads to the
fault discussed under Rule 18. A loose sentence formed
with but can usually be converted into a periodic sentence
formed with although.
Particularly awkward is one but closely following another, thus making a contrast to a contrast, or a reservation
to a reservation. This is easily corrected by rearrangement.
country had vast
resources but seemed aImost wholly unprepared
for war. But within a year
it had created an army of
four million.
OUf

Our country seemed
almost wholly unprepared
for war, but it had vast resources. Within a year it
had created an army of
four million.

Can. Means "am (is, are) able." Not to be used as a
substitute for may.

Care less. The dismissive <'I couldn't care less" is often
used with the shortened "not" mistakenly (and mysteriously) omitted: "I could care less." The error destroys the
meaning of the sentence and is careless indeed.

Case.

Often unnecessary.

In many cases, the rooms
lacked air conditioning.
It has rarely been the

case that any mistake has
been made.

Many of the rooms
lacked air conditioning.
Few mistakes have been
made.

Certainly.

Used indiscriminately by some speakers,
much as others use very, in an attempt to intensify any and
every statement. A mannerism of this kind, bad in speech,
is even worse in writing.

Character.

Often simply redundant, used from a mere
habit of wordiness.
acts of a hostile character
hostile acts

Claim (verb). With object-noun, means "lay claim to."
May be used with a dependent clause if this sense is clear-

MISUSED WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS

[43

ly intended: "She claimed that she was the sole heir." (But
even here claimed to be would be better.) Not to be used as
a substitute for declare, maintain, or charge.
He claimed he knew
how.

He declared he knew
how.

Clever.

Note that the word means one thing when
applied to people, another when applied to horses. A clever
horse is a good-natured one, not an ingenious one.

Compare.

To compare to is to point out or imply
resemblances between objects regarded as essentially of
a different order; to compare with is mainly to point out
differences between objects regarded as essentially of the
same order. Thus, life has been compared to a pilgrimage,
to a drama, to a battle; Congress may be compared with
the British Parliament. Paris has been compared to ancient
Athens; it may be compared with modem London.

Comprise.

Literally, "embrace": A zoo comprises mammals, reptiles, and birds (because it "embraces," or "includes," them). But animals do not comprise ("embrace") a
zoo-they constitute a zoo.

Consider.

N at followed by as when it means "believe

to be."
I consider him as

competent.

I consider him

competent.

When considered means"examined" or "discussed," it is followed by as:
The lecturer considered Eisenhower first as soldier and
second as administrator.

Contact.

As a transitive verb, the word is vague and
self-important. Do not contact people; get in touch with
them, look them up, phone them, find them, or meet

them.

44]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

An intransitive verb used with with. In formal
writing, one doesn't "cope," one "copes with" something or
somebody.

Cope.

I knew theid cope.
(jocular)

I knew they would cope
with the situation.

Currently. In the sense of now with a verb in the present tense, currently is usually redundant; emphasis is better achieved through a more precise reference to time.
We are currently reviewing your application.

We are at this moment
reviewing your application.

Data.

Like strata, phenomena, and media, data is a
plural and is best used with a plural verb. The word, however, is slowly gaining acceptance as a singular.
The data is misleading.

These data are misleading.

Different than. Here logic supports established usage:
one thing differs from another, hence, different from. Or,
other than, unlike.
Disinterested. Means CCimpartial." Do not confuse it
with uninterested, which lneans "not interested in."
Let a disinterested person judge our dispute. (an
impartial person)
This man is obviously uninterested in our dispute.
(couldn't care less)

Divided into.

N at to be misused for composed of The
line is sometimes difficult to draw; doubtless plays are
divided into acts, but poems are composed of stanzas. An
apple, halved, is divided into sections, but an apple is composed of seeds, flesh, and skin.

Due to.

Loosely used for through, because of or owing
to, in adverbial phrases.
He lost the first game
due to carelessness.

He lost the first game
because of carelessness.

MISUSED WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS

[45

In correct use, synonymous with attributable to: ('The accident was due to bad weather"; "losses due to preventable
fires."

Each and every one.

Pitchman's jargon. Avoid, except

in dialogue.
It should be a lesson to
each and every one of us.

Effect.

It should be a lesson to
every one of us (to us all).

As a noun, means "resulf'; as a verb, means "to

bring about," "to accomplish" (not to be confused with
affect, which means «to influence").
As a noun, often loosely used in perfunctory writing
about fashions, music, painting, and other arts: "a Southwestern effect"; "effects in pale green"; "very delicate effects"; "subtle effects"; "a charming effect was produced."
The writer who has a definite meaning to express will not
take refuge in such vagueness.

Enormity.

Use only in the sense of"monstrous wickedness." Misleading, if not wrong, when used to express bigness.

Enthuse.

An annoying verb growing out of the noun
enthusiasm. Not recommended.
She was enthused about
her new car.
She enthused about her
new car.

Etc.

She was enthusiastic
about her new car.
She talked enthusiastically (expressed enthusiasm) about her new car.

Literally, "and other things"; sometimes loosely
used to mean "and other persons." The phrase is equivalent
to and the rest, and so forth, and hence is not to be used if
one of these would be insufficient-that is, if the reader
would be left in doubt as to any important particulars. Least
open to objection when it represents the last terms of a list
already given almost in full, or immaterial words at the end
of a quotation.

46]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

At the end of a list introduced by such as~for example~ or
any similar expression, etc. is incorrect. In formal writing,
etc. is a misfit. An item important enough to call for etc. is
probably important enough to be named.
Use this word only of matters capable of direct
verification, not of matters of judgment. That a particular
event happened on a given date and that lead melts at a certain temperature are facts. But such conclusions as that
Napoleon was the greatest of modem generals or that the
climate of California is delightful, however defensible they
may be, are not properly called facts.

Fact.

Facility.

Why must jails, hospitals, and schools suddenly become ('facilities"?
Parents complained bitterly about the fire hazard
in the wooden facility.

Parents complained bitterly about the fire hazard
in the wooden schoolhouse.

He has been appointed
warden of the new facility.

He has been appointed
warden of the new prison.

Factor.

A hackneyed word; the expressions ofwhich it
is a part can usually be replaced by something more direct
and idiomatic.

Her superior training
was the great factor in her
winning the match.

She won the match by
being better trained.

Air power is becoming
an increasingly important
factor in deciding battles.

Air power is playing a
larger and larger part in
deciding battles.

Farther. Further.

The two words are commonly interchanged, but there is a distinction worth observing: farther
serves best as a distance word,jurther as a time or quantity
word. You chase a ball farther than the other fellow; you
pursue a subject further.

MIS USE D W 0 R D SAN D EX PRE S S ION S

[ 47

Feature. Another haclmeyed word; like facto~ it usually adds nothing to the sentence in which it occurs.
A feature of the entertainment especially worthy
of mention was the singing

of Allison Jones.

(Better use the same
number of words to tell
what Allison Jones sang and
how she sang it.)

As a verb, in the sense ofccoffer as a special attraction," it
is to be avoided.

Finalize.

A pompous, ambiguous verb. (See Chapter
V, Reminder 21.)

Fix.

Colloquial in America for arrange, prepare, nwnd.
The usage is well established. But bear in mind that this
verb is from figere: "to make firm," "to place definitely."
These are the preferred meanings of the word.

Flammable.

An oddity, chiefly useful in saving lives. The

common word meaning "combustible" is inflammable. But
some people are thrown off by the in- and think inflammable
means 'Cnot combustible." For this reason, trucks carrying
gasoline or explosives are now marked FLAMMABLE. Unless
you are operating such a truck and hence are concerned with
the safety of children and illiterates, use inflammable.

A collective noun, equivalent to people. {f~e
the singular form only. Folks, in the sense of "parents:~
"family:~ "those present," is colloquial and too folksy for
FofA..

formal writing.
Her folks arrived by the
afternoon train.

Her father and mother
arrived by the afternoon
train.

Fortuitous. Limited to what happens by chance. Not
to be used for fortunate or lucky.

48]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

Get.

The colloquial have got for have should not be
used in writing. The preferable fonn of the participle is got,
not gotten.
He has not got any
sense.
They returned without
having gotten any.

Gratuitous.

He has no sense.
They returned without
having got any.

Means "unearned," or cCunwarranted."

The insult seemed gratuitous. (undeserved)

He is a man who.
sion; see Rule 17.

A common type ofredundant expres-

He is a man who is very
ambitious.

He is very ambitious.

Vermont is a state that
attracts visitors because of
its winter sports.

Vennont attracts visitors
because of its winter sports.

Hopefully.

This once-useful adverb meaning "with
hope" has been distorted and is now widely used to mean
"I hope" or "it is to be hoped." Such use is not merely
wrong, it is Silly. To say, cCHopefully I'll leave on the noon
plane" is to talk nonsense. Do you mean you'll leave on
the noon plane in a hopeful frame of mind? Or do you
mean you hope you'll leave on the noon plane? Whichever you mean, you haven't said it clearly. Although the
word in its new, free-floating capacity may be pleasurable

and even useful to many, it offends the ear of many others, who do not like to see words dulled or eroded, particularly when the erosion leads to ambiguity, softness, or
nonsense.

However. Avoid starting a sentence with however
when the meaning is "nevertheless." The word usually
serves better when not in first position.

MIS USE D W 0 R D SAN D EX PRE S S ION S

The roads were almost
impassable. However, we at
last succeeded in reaching
camp.

[ 49

The roads were almost
impassable. At last, however, we succeeded in
reaching camp.

When however comes first, it means "in whatever way"

or "to whatever extent."
However you advise him, he will probably do as he
thinks best.
However discouraging the prospect, they never lost heart.

Illusion.

See allusion.

Imply. Infer.

Not interchangeable. Something implied
is something suggested or indicated, though not expressed.
Something inferred is something deduced from evidence at

hand.
Farming implies early rising.
Since she was a farmer, we inferred that she got up early.

Importantly.

Avoid by rephrasing.

More importantly, he
paid for the damages.

Whafs more, he paid for
the damages.

With the breeze freshening, he altered course to
pass inside the island. More
importantly, as things
turned out, he tucked in a
reef.

With the breeze freshening, he altered course to
pass inside the island. More
important, as things turned
out, he tucked in a reef. -

In regard to. Often wrongly written in regards to. But
as regards is correct, and means the same thing.
In the last analysis.

A bankrupt expression.

Inside of. Inside. The of following inside is correct in
the adverbial meaning "in less than." In other meanings, of
15

unnecessary.
Inside of five minutes

rn be inside the bank.

50]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

Insightful. The word is a suspicious overstatement for
"perceptive." If it is to be used at all, it should be used for
instances of remarkably penetrating vision. Usually, it crops
up merely to inflate the commonplace.
That was an insightful
remark you made.

In terms of.

That was a perceptive
remark you made.

A piece of padding usually best omitted.

The job was unattractive
in terms of salary.

The salary made the job
unattractive.

Interesting.

An unconvincing word; avoid it as a means
of introduction. Instead of announcing that what you are
about to tell is interesting, make it so.
An interesting story is
told of
In connection with the
forthcoming visit of Mr. B.
to America, it is interesting
to recall that he

(Tell the story without
preamble.)
Mr. B., who will soon
visit America

Also to be avoided in introduction is the word funny.
Nothing becomes funny by being labeled so.

Irregardless.

Should be regardless. The error results
from failure to see the negative in -less and from a desire to
get it in as a preflX, suggested by such words as irregulat:
irresponsible, and, perhaps especially, irrespective.

-ize.

Do not coin verbs by adding this tempting suffix. Many good and useful verbs do end in -ize: summarize,
fraternize, harmonize,fertilize. But there is a growing list
of abominations: containerize, prioritize,finalize, to name
three. Be suspicious of -ize; let your ear and your eye
guide you. Never tack -ize onto a noun to create a verb.
Usually you will discover that a useful verb already exists.
Why say "utilize" when there is the simple, unpretentious
word use?

MIS USE D W 0 R D SAN D EX PRE S S ION S

[51

Kind of.

Except in familiar style, not to be used as a
substitute for rather or something like. Restrict it to its literal sense: "Amber is a kind of fossil resin"; "} dislike that
kind of publicity." The same holds true for sort of

Lay. A transitive verb. Except in slang ("Let it lay"), do
not misuse it for the intransitive verb lie. The hen, or the
play, lays an egg; the llama lies down. The playwright went
home and lay down.
lie, lay, lain, lying
lay, laid, laid, laying

Leave.

Not to be misused for let.

Leave it stand the way it

Let it stand the way it is.

Leave go of that rope t

Let go of that rope'

IS.

Le88.

Should not be misused for fewer.

They had less workers
than in the previous cam-

They had fewer workers
than in the previous cam-

paign.

paign.

Less refers to quantity, fewer to number. "His troubles
are less than mine" means "His troubles are not so great as
mine." ~~His troubles are fewer than mine" means ~'His troubles are not so numerous as mine."

Like.

Not to be used for the conjunction as. Like governs nouns and pronouns; before phrases and clauses the
equivalent word is as.
We spent the evening
like in the old days.
Chloe smells good, like a

baby should.

We spent the evening as
in the old days.
Chloe smells good, as a
baby should.

52]

THE E L E MEN T S 0 F STY L E

The use of like for as has its defenders; they argue that any
usage that achieves currency becomes valid automatically.
This, they say, is the way the language is formed. It is and
it isn't. An expression sometimes merely enjoys a vogue,
much as an article of apparel does. Like has long been
widely misused by the illiterate; lately it has been taken up
by the knowing and the well-informed, who find it catchy,
or liberating, and who use it as though they were slumming. If every word or device that achieved currency were
immediately authenticated, simply on the ground of popularity, the language would be as chaotic as a ball game with
no foul lines. For the student, perhaps the most useful
thing to know about like is that most carefully edited publications regard its use before phrases and clauses as simple error.
Line in the sense of ~~course
of procedure, conduct, thoughf' is allowable but has been
so overworked, particularly in the phrase along these lines,
that a writer who aims at freshness or originality had better
discard it entirely.

Line. Along these lines.

Mr. B. also spoke along
the same lines.

She is studying along the
line of French literature.

Mr. B. also spoke to the
same effect.
She is studying French

literature.

Literal. Literally.

Often incorrectly used in support
of exaggeration or violent metaphor.
a literal flood of abuse
literally dead with

a flood of abuse
almost dead with fatigue

fatigue

Loan.

A noun. As a verb, prefer lend.

Lend me your ears.
the loan of your ears

MISUSED WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS

Meaningful.

[53

A bankrupt adjective. Choose another, or

rephrase.
His was a meaningful
contribution.
We are instituting many
meaningful changes in the

His contribution counted

heavily.
We are improving the
curriculum in many ways.

curriculum.
Memento.

Most.

Often incorrectly written momento.

Nat to be used for alrrwst in formal composition.

most everybody

almost everybody

most all the time

almost all the time

Nature.

Often simply redundant, used like character.

acts of a hostile nature

hostile acts

Nature should be avoided in such vague expressions as
"a lover of nature," "poems about nature." Unless more
specific statements follow, the reader cannot tell whether
the poems have to do with natural scenery, rural life, the sunset, the untracked wilderness, or the habits of squirrels.

Nauseous. Nauseated.

The first means "sickening to
contemplate"'; the second means "sick at the stomach." Do
not, therefore, say, "I feel nauseous," unless you are sure you
have that effect on others.

Nice.

A shaggy, all-purpose word, to be used sparingly
in formal composition, "'1 had a nice time," "'It was nice
weather," "She was so nice to her mother." The meanings
are indistinct. Nice is most useful in the sense of "precise"
or "delicate": "a nice distinction."

Nor.
pressions,

Often used wrongly for or after negative ex-

54]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

He cannot eat nor sleep.

He cannot eat or sleep.
He can neither eat nor
sleep.
He cannot eat nor can
he sleep.

Noun used a8 verb.

Many nouns have lately been
pressed into service as verbs. Nat all are bad, but all are

suspect.

Be prepared for kisses
when you gift your girlfriend with this merry
scent.

The candidate hosted
a dinner for fifty of her
workers.
The meeting was
chaired by Mr. Oglethorp.
She headquarters in
Newark.
The theater troupe'
debuted last fall.

Be prepared for kisses
when you give your girlfriend this merry scent.

The candidate gave
a dinner for fifty of her
workers.
Mr. OgIethorp was chair
of the meeting.

She has headquarters in
Newark.
The theatre troupe
made its debut last fall.

Offputting. Ongoing.

Newfound adjectives, to be
avoided because they are inexact and clumsy. Ongoing is a
mix of "continuing" and "active" and is usually superfluous.
He devoted all his spare
time to the ongoing program for aid to the elderly.

He devoted all his spare
time to the program for aid
to the elderly.

Offputting might mean <:<:objectionable," "disconcerting,"
"distasteful." Select instead a word whose meaning is clear.
As a simple test, transform the participles to verbs. It is possible to upset something. But to offput? To ongo?

One. In the sense of "a person," not to be followed by
his or her.

MISUSED WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS

One must watch his
step.

(55

One must watch one's
step. (You must watch your
step.)

One of the most.

Avoid this feeble formula. "One of
the most exciting developments of modern science is ...";
"SV\itzerland is one of the most beautiful countries of
Europe." There is nothing wrong with the grammar; the
formula is simply threadbare.

-oriented. A clumsy, pretentious device, much in vogue.
Find a better way of indicating orientation or alignment or
direction.
It was a manufacturingoriented company.

Many of the skits are
situation-oriented.

It was a company chiefly
concerned with manufacturing.
Many of the skits rely on
situation.

Not always interchangeable with partly.
Best used in the sense of "to a certain degree," when speaking of a condition or state: «I'm partially resigned to it."
Partly carries the idea of a part as distinct from the wholeusually a physical object.

Partially.

The log was partially
submerged.

The log was partly submerged.

She was partially in and
partially out.

She was partly in and
partly out.
She was part in, part
out.

Participle for verbal noun.
There was little prospect
of the Senate accepting
even this compromise.

There was little prospect
of the Senate's accepting
even this compromise.

In the lefthand column, accepting is a present participle;
in. the righthand column, it is a verbal noun (gerund). The

56]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

construction shown in the lefthand column is occasionally
found, and has its defenders. Yet it is easy to see that the
second sentence has to do not with a prospect of the Senate but with a prospect of accepting.
Any sentence in which the use of the possessive is awkward or impossible should of course be recast.
In the event of a reconsideration of the whole matter's becoming necessary

If it should become necessary to reconsider the
whole matter

There was great dissatisfaction with the decision of
the arbitrators being favorable to the company.

There was great dissatisfaction \vith the arbitrators'
decision in favor of the
company.

People. A word with many meanings. (The American
Heritage Dictionary, Third Edition, gives nine.) The people
is a political term, not to be confused with the public. From
the people comes political support or opposition; from the
public comes artistic appreciation or commercial patronage.
The word people is best not used with words of number,
in place of persons. If of «six people" five went away, how
many people would be left? Answer: one people.

Personalize.

A pretentious word, often carrying bad
advice. Do not personalize your prose; simply make it good
and keep it clean. See Chapter V, Reminder 1.

a highly personalized
affair
Personalize your
stationery.

Personally.

Design a letterhead.

Often unnecessary.

Personally, I thought it
was a good book.

Possess.

a highly personal affair

I thought it a good book.

Often used because to the writer it sounds
more impressive than have or own. Such usage is not incorrect but is to be guarded against.

MIS V SED W 0 R D SAN D EX PRE S S ION S

[57

She possessed great
courage.

She had great courage
(was very brave).

He was the fortunate
possessor of

He was lucky enough to
own

Presently.

Has two meanings: "in a short while" and
"currently." Because of this ambiguity it is best restricted to
the first meaning: «She'll be here presently" ("soon," or "in
a short time").

Prestigious. Often an adjective oflast resort. It's in the
dictionary, but that doesn't mean you have to use it.
Refer.

See allude.

Regretful.

Sometimes carelessly used for regrettable:
"The mixup was due to a regretful breakdo\Vll in communications."

Relate.
port.

Not to be used intransitively to suggest rap-

I relate well to Janet.

Respective. Respectively.
be omitted with advantage.

Janet and I see things
the same way.
Janet and I have a lot in
common.

These words may usually

Works of fiction are
listed under the names of
their respective authors.

Works of fiction are
listed under the names of
their authors.

The mile run and the
two-mile run were won by
Jones and Cummings
respectively.

The mile run was won
by Jones, the two-mile run
by Cummings.

Secondly, thirdly, etc.

Unless you are prepared to
begin with firstly and defend it (which will be difficult), do
not prettify numbers with -ly. Modern usage prefers sec-

ond, third, and so on.

58]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

Shall. Will.

In formal writing, the future tense requires shall for the first person, will for the second and
third. The formula to express the speaker's belief regarding
a future action or state is I shall; I will expresses determination or consent. A swimmer in distress cries, "1 shall
drown; no one will save me!" A suicide puts it the other way:
"I will drown; no one shall save me!" In relaxed speech,
however, the words shall and will are seldom used precisely; our ear guides us or fails to guide us, as the caSe may be,
and we are quite likely to drown when we want to survive
and survive when we want to drown.

So.

Avoid, in writing, the use of so as an intensifier: "so

good"; so warm"; "so delightful."
CC

Sort of.

See kind of

Split infinitive.

There is precedent from the fourteenth century down for interposing an adverb between to
and the infinitive it governs, but the construction should be
avoided unless the writer wishes to place unusual stress on

the adverb.
to diligently inquire

to inquire diligently

For another side to the split infinitive, see Chapter

v: Re-

minder 14.

State. Not to be used as a mere substitute for say,
remark. Restrict it to the sense of express fully or clearlyu:
U

UHe refused to state his objections."

Student body.

Nine times out of ten a needless and

awkward expression, meaning no more than the Simple
word students.
a member ofthe student

. a student

body
popular with the student

body

liked by the students

MIS USE D W 0 R D SAN D EX PRE S S ION S

[ 59

Than.

Any sentence \\lith than (to express comparison)
should be examined to make sure no essential words are
missing.
I'm probably closer to

my mother than my father.
(Ambiguous.)

I'm probably closer to

my mother than to my
father.
I'm probably closer to
my mother than my father
is.

It looked more like a
cormorant than a heron.

It looked more like a cormorant than like a heron.

Thanking you in advance. This sounds as if the
writer meant, "It will not be worth my while to write to you
again." In making your request, write 'Will you please," or
"I shall be obliged." Then, later, if you feel moved to do so,
or if the circumstances call for it, write a letter of acknowledgment.

That. Which. That is the defining, or restrictive, pronoun, which the nondefining, or nonrestrictive. (See Rule 3.)
The lawn mower that is broken is in the garage. (Tells
which one.)
The lawn mower, which is broken, is in the garage.
(Adds a fact about the only mower in question.)

The use of which for that is common in written and spoken
language ("Let us now go even unto Bethlehem, and see
this thing which is come to pass."). Occasionally which
seems preferable to that, as in the sentence from the Bible.
But it would be a convenience to all if these two pronouns
were used with precision. Careful writers, watchful for
small conveniences, go which-hunting, remove the defining whiches, and by so doing improve their work.
A cliche, and a fuzzy one.
How much of the future is foreseeable? Ten minutes? Ten
years? Any ofit? By whom is it foreseeable? Seers? Experts?
Everybody?

The foreseeable future.

60]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

The troth is..•• The fact is. . .. A bad beginning for
a sentence. If you feel you are possessed of the truth, or of
the fact, simply state it. Do not give it advance billing.

They. He or She.

Do not use they when the antecedent is a distributive expression such as each, each one,
everybody, every one, many a man. Use the singular pronOUD.

Every one of us knows
they are fallible.

Every one of us knows .
he is fallible.

Everyone in the community, whether they are a
member of the Association
or not, is invited to attend.

Everyone in the community, whether he is a
member of the Association
or not, is invited to attend.

A similar fault is the use of the plural pronoun with the
antecedent anybody, somebody, som.eone, the intention being either to avoid the awkward he or she or to avoid committing oneself to one or the other. Some bashful speakers
even say, "A friend of mine told me that they...."
The use of he as a pronoun for nouns embracing both
genders is a simple, practical convention rooted in the
beginnings of the English language. Currently, however,
many writers find the use of the generic he or his to rename
indefinite antecedents limiting or offensive. Substituting he
or she in its place is the logical thing to do if it works. But
it often doesn't work, if only because repetition makes it
sound boring or Silly.
Consider these strategies to avoid an awkward overuse of
he or she or an unintentional emphasis on the masculine:

Use the plural rather than the Singular.
The writer must address
his readers' concerns.

Writers must address
their readers' concerns.

Eliminate the pronoun altogether.
The writer must address
his readers' concerns.

The writer must address
readers' concerns.

MIS USE D W 0 R D SAN D EX PRE S S ION S

[61

Substitute the second person for the third person.

The writer must address
his readers' concerns.

As a writer, you must
address your readers'
concerns.

Noone need fear to use he if common sense supports it.
If you think she is a handy substitute for he, try it and see
what happens. Alternatively, put all controversial nouns in
the plural and avoid the choice of sex altogether, although
you may find your prose sounding general and diffuse as a
result.

This.

The pronoun this, referring to the complete
sense of a preceding sentence or clause, can't always carry
the load and so may produce an imprecise statement.

Visiting dignitaries
watched yesterday as
ground was broken for the
new high-energy physics
laboratory with a blowout
safety wall. This is the first
visible evidence of the university's plans for modemization and expansion.

Visiting dignitaries
watched yesterday as
ground was broken for the
new high-energy physics
laboratory with a blowout
safety wall. The ceremony
afforded the first visible
evidence of the university's
plans for modernization
and expansion.

In the lefthand example above, this does not immediately
make clear what the first visible evidence is.

Thrust.

This showy noun, suggestive ofpower, hinting
of sex, is the darling of executives, politicos, and speechwriters. Use it sparingly. Save it for specific application.

Our reorganization plan
has a tremendous thrust.

The piston has a fiveinch thrust.

The thrust of his letter
was that he was working
more hours than he'd bargained for.

The point he made in
his letter was that he was
working more hours than
he'd bargained for.

62]

THE E L E MEN T S 0 F STY L E

Tortuous. Torturous.

A winding road is tortuous, a
painful ordeal is torturous. Both words carry the idea of
"twist," the twist having been a form of torture.
Not to be used in the sense of «happen,"
"come to pass." Many vvriters so use it (usually when groping toward imagined elegance), but their usage finds little
support in the Latin «breathe across or through." It is correct, however, in the sense of "become mown." "Eventually, the grim account of his villainy transpired" (literally,
<'leaked through or auf').

Transpire.

Try.

Takes the infinitive: "try to mend it," not '<try and
mend it." Students of the language will argue that try and
has won through and become idiom. Indeed it has, and it is
relaxed and acceptable. But try to is precise, and when you
are writing formal prose, try and write try to.
Not a synonym for kind of The examples below
are common vulgarisms.

Type.

that type employee
I dislike that type

publicity.
small, home-type hotels
. a new type plane

. that kind of employee

I dislike that kind of
publicity.
small, homelike hotels
a plane of a new design
(new kind)

Unique.

Means "without like or equal." Hence, there
can be no degrees of uniqueness.

It was the most unique
coffee maker on the
market.
The balancing act was
. very unIque.
Of all the spiders, the
one that lives in a bubble
under water is the most
unique.

It was a unique coffee
maker.
The balancing act was
unIque.
Among spiders, the one
that lives in a bubble under
water is unique.

MISUSED WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS

Utilize.

[63

Prefer use.

I utilized the facilities.
He utilized the dishwasher.

Verbal.

I used the toilet.
He used the dishwasher.
U

Sometimes means "word for word and in this
sense may refer to something expressed in writing. Oral
(from Latin as, «mouthl» limits the meaning to what is
transmitted by speech. Oral agreement is more precise than
verbal agreement.

Very.

Use this word sparingly. Where emphasis is necessary, use words strong in themselves.

While.

Avoid the indiscriminate use of this word for
and, but, and although. Many writers use it frequently as a
substitute for and or but, either from a mere desire to vary
the connective or from doubt about which of the two connectives is more appropriate. In this use it is best replaced
by a semicolon.
The office and salesrooms are on the ground
floor, while the rest of the
building is used for manufacturing.

The office and salesrooms are on the ground
floor; the rest of the building is used for manufacturing.

Its use as a virtual equivalent of although is allowable in
sentences where this leads to no ambiguity or absurdity.
While I admire his energy, I wish it were employed in a
better cause.

This is entirely correct, as shown by the paraphrase
I admire his energy; at the same time, I wish it were
employed in ~ better cause.

Compare:
While the temperature reaches 90 or 95 degrees in the
daytime, the nights are often chilly.

64]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

The paraphrase shows why the use of while is incorrect:
The temperature reaches 90 or 95 degrees in the daytime; at the same time the nights are often chilly.
In general, the writer will do well to use while only with
strict literalness, in the sense of «during the time that."

-wise.

Not to be used indiscriminately as a pseudosuffix: taxwise, pricewise, ntarriagewise, prosewise, saltwater
taffywise. Chiefly useful when it means "in the manner of':
clockwise. There is not a noun in the language to which
-wise cannot be added if the spirit moves one to add it. The
sober writer will abstain from the use of this wild additive.

Worth while.

Overworked as a term ofvague approval
and (with not) of disapproval. Strictly applicable only to
actions: "Is it worth while to telegraph?"
His books are not worth
while.

His books are not worth
reading (are not worth
one's while to read; do not
repay reading).

The adjective worthwhile (one word) is acceptable but emaciated. Use a stronger word.
a worthwhile project

a promising (useful,
valuable, exciting) project

Would.

Commonly used to express habitual or repeated
action. ("He would get up early and prepare his own breakfast before he went to work.") But when the idea of habit or

repetition is expressed, in such phrases as once a year, even}
day, each Sunday, the past tense, without would, is usually
sufficient, and, from its brevity, more emphatic.
Once a year he would
visit the old mansion.

Once a year he visited
the old mansion.

In narrative writing, always indicate the transition from the
general to the particular-that is, from sentences that merely state a general habit to those that express the action of a

MISUSED WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS

[65

specific day or period. Failure to indicate the change will
cause confusion.
Townsend would get up early and prepare his own
breakfast. If the day was cold, he filled the stove and had a
warm fire burning before he left the house. On his way
out to the garage, he noticed that there were footprints in
the new-fallen snow on the porch.
The reader is lost, having received no signal that Townsend

has changed from a mere man of habit to a man who has
seen a particular thing on a particular day.
Townsend would get up early and prepare his own
breakfast. If the day was cold, he filled the stove and had a
warm fire burning before he left the house. One morning
in January, on his way out to the garage, he noticed footprints in the new-fallen snow on the porch.

v
An Approach to Style
(With a List of Reminders)

UP TO this point, the book has been concerned with what is
correct, or acceptable, in the use of English. In this final
chapter:~ we approach style in its broader meaning: style in
the sense of what is distinguished and distinguishing. Here
we leave solid ground. Who can confidently say what ignites
a certain combination ofwords, causing them to explode in
the mind? Who knows why certain notes in music are capable of stirring the listener deeply, though the same notes
slightly rearranged are impotent? These are high mysteries,
and this chapter is a mystery story, thinly disguised. There
is no satisfactory explanation of style, no infallible guide to
good writing, no assurance that a person who thinks clear1y will be able to write clearly, no key that unlocks the door,
no inflexible rule by \vhich writers may shape their course.
Writers will often find thelnselves steering by stars that are
disturbingly in motion.
The preceding chapters contain instructions dra\Vl1 from
established English usage; this one contains advice drawn
from a writer's experience of writing. Since the book is a
role book, these cautionary remarks, these subtly dangerous hints, are presented in the form of rules, but they are,
in essence, mere gentle reminders: they state what most of
us know and at times forget.
Style is an increment in \Vriting. When we speak of Fitz~erald's style, we don't mean his comlnand of the relative

66

AN A P PRO AC H TO STYL E

[67

pronoun, we mean the sound his words make on paper. All
writers, by the way they use the language, reveal something
of their spirits, their habits, their capacities, and their biases.
This is inevitable as well as enjoyable. All writing is communication; creative writing is communication through revelation-it is the Self escaping into the open. No writer long
remains incognito.
If you doubt that style is something of a mystery, try
rewriting a familiar sentence and see what happens. Any
much-quoted sentence will do. Suppose we take "These are
the times that try men's souls." Here we have eight short,
easy words, forming a simple declarative sentence. The sentence contains no flashy ingredient such as "'Damn the torpedoes!" and the words, as you see, are ordinary. Yet in that
arrangement, they have shown great durability; the sentence
is into its third century. Now compare a few variations:
Times like these try men's souls.
How trying it is to live in these times!
These are trying times for men's souls.
Saulwise, these are trying times.
It seems unlikely that Thomas Paine could have made his
sentiment stick if he had couched it in any of these forms.
But why not? No fault of grammar can be detected in them,
and in every case the meaning is clear. Each version is correct, and each, for some reason that we can't readily put our
finger 00, is marked for oblivion. We could, of course, talk
about ~~rhythm" and "cadence," but the talk would be vague
and unconvincing. We could declare soulwise to be a silly
word, inappropriate to the occasion; but even that won't
do--it does not answer the main question. Are we even sure
soulwise is silly? If otherwise is a serviceable word, what's
the matter with soulwise?
Here is another sentence, this one by a later Tom. It is
not a famous sentence, although its author (Thomas Wolfe)
is well known. ~'Quick are the mouths of earth, and quick
the teeth that fed upon this loveliness." The sentence would

68]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

not take a prize for clarity, and rhetorically it is at the opposite pole from "These are the times." Try it in a different
form, without the inversions:
The mouths of earth are quick, and the teeth that fed
upon this loveliness are quick, too.
The author's meaning is still intact, but not his overpowering emotion. What was poetical and sensuous has become
prosy and wooden; instead of the secret sounds of beauty,
we are left with the simple crunch of mastication. (Whether
Mr. Wolfe was guilty of overwriting is, of course, another
question--one that is not pertinent here.)
With some writers, style not only reveals the spirit of the
man but reveals his identity, as surely as would his fingerprints. Here, following, are two brief passages from the
works of two American novelists. The subject in each case
is languor. In both, the words used are ordinary, and there
is nothing eccentric about the construction.
He did not still feel weak, he was merely luxuriating in
that supremely gutful lassitude of convalescence in which
time, hurry, doing, did not exist, the accumulating seconds
and minutes and hours to which in its well state the body
is slave both waking and sleeping, now reversed and time
now the lip-server and mendicant to the body's pleasure
instead of the body thrall to time's headlong course.
Manuel drank his brandy. He felt sleepy himself. It was
too hot to go out into the town. Besides there was nothing
to do. He wanted to see Zurita. He would go to sleep
while he waited.
Anyone acquainted with Faulkner and Hemingway will
have recognized them in these passages and perceived
which was which. How different are their languors!
Or take two American poets, stopping at evening. One
stops by woods, the other by laughing flesh.
My little horse must think it queer
To stop without a farmhouse near

A NAP PRO A C H TO STY L E

[ 69

Between the woods and frozen lake
The darkest evening of the year. *
I have perceived that to be with those I like is enough,
To stop in company with the rest at evening is enough,
To be surrounded by beautiful, curious, breathing,
laughing flesh is enough ...
Because of the characteristic styles, there is little question about identity here, and ifthe situations were reversed,
with Whitman stopping by woods and Frost by laughing
flesh (not one of his regularly scheduled stops), the reader
would know who was who.
Young writers often suppose that style is a garnish for the
meat of prose, a sauce by which a dull dish is made palatable. Style has no such separate entity; it is nondetachable,
unfilterable. The beginner should approach style warily,
realizing that it is an expression of self, and should tum resolutely away from all devices that are popularly believed to
indicate style-all mannerisms, tricks, adornments. The
approach to style is by way of plainness, Simplicity, orderliness, sincerity.
Writing is, for most, laborious and slow. The mind travels faster than the pen; consequently, writing becomes a
question of learning to make occasional wing shots, bringing down the bird of thought as it flashes by. A writer is
a gunner, sometimes waiting in the blind for something
to come in, sometimes roaming the countrySide hoping to
scare something up. Like other gunners, the writer must
cultivate patience, working many covers to bring down one
partridge. Here, follOwing, are some suggestions and cautionary hints that may help the beginner find the way to a
satisfactory style.
*From "Stopping by Woods on a Snowy Evening" from The
Poetry of Robert Frost, edited by Edward Connery Lathem. Copyright 1923, © 1969 by Henry Holt and Company, LLC. Reprinted by
permission of Henry Holt and Company, LLC.

70]

THE E L E MEN T S 0 F STY L E

1. Place yourself in the background.
Write in a way that draws the reader's attention to the
sense and substance of the writing, rather than to the mood
and temper of the author. If the writing is solid and good,
the mood and temper of the writer will eventually be
revealed and not at the expense of the work. Therefore, the
first piece of advice is this: to achieve style, begin by affecting none-that is, place yourself in the background. A careful and honest writer does not need to worry about style. As
you become proficient in the use oflanguage, your style will
emerge, because you yourself will emerge, and when this
happens you will find it increasingly easy to break through
the barriers that separate you from other minds, other
hearts-which is, of course, the purpose of writing, as well
as its principal reward. Fortunately, the act of composition,
or creation, disciplines the mind; \¥riling is one way to go
about thinking, and the practice and habit of writing not
only drain the mind but supply it, too.
2. Write in a way that comes naturally.
Write in a way that comes easily and naturally to you,
using words and phrases that come readily to hand. But
do not assume that because you have acted naturally your
product is without flaw.
The use of language begins with imitation. The infant
imitates the sounds made by its parents; the child imitates
first the spoken language, then the stuff of books. The imitative life continues long after the writer is secure in the language, for it is almost impossible to avoid imitating what one
admires. Never imitate consciously, but do not worry about
being an imitator; take pains instead to admire what is good.
Then when you write in a way that comes naturally, you will
echo the halloos that bear repeating.
3. Work from a suitable design.
Before beginning to compose something, gauge the nature and extent of the enterprise and work from a suitable
deSign. (See Chapter II, Rule 12.) Design informs even the

A NAP PRO A C H T 0

STY L E

[ 71

simplest structure, whether of brick and steel or of prose.
You raise a pup tent from one sort ofvision, a cathedral from
another. This does not mean that you must sit with a blueprint always in front of you, merely that you had best anticipate what you are getting into. To compose a laundry list,
you can work directly from the pile of soiled garments, ticking them off one by one. But to write a biography, you will
need at least a rough scheme; you cannot plunge in blindly
and start ticking off fact after fact about your subject, lest
you miss the forest for the trees and there be no end to your
labors.
Sometimes, of course, impulse and emotion are more
compelling than design. If you are deeply troubled and are
composing a letter appealing for mercy or for love, you had
best not attempt to organize your emotions; the prose will
have a better chance if the emotions are left in disarraywhich you'll probably have to do an)'\Vay, since feelings do
not usually lend themselves to rearrangement. But even
the kind of writing that is essentially adventurous and impetuous will on examination be found to have a secret plan:
Columbus didn't just sail, he sailed west, and the New World
took shape from this Simple and, we now think, sensible
deSign.

4. Write with nouns and verbs.
Write with nouns and verbs, not with adjectives and adverbs. The adjective hasn't been built that can pull a weak
or inaccurate noun out of a tight place. This is not to disparage adjectives and adverbs; they are indispensable parts of
speech. Occasionally they surprise us with their power, as in
Up the airy mountain,
Down the rushy glen,
We daren't go a-hunting
For fear of little men ...
The nouns mountain and glen are accurate enough, but had
the mountain not become airy, the glen rushy, William Allingham might never have got off the ground with his poem. In

72]

THE E L E MEN T S 0 F STY L E

general, however, it is nouns and verbs, not their assistants,
that give good writing its toughness and color.

5. Revise and rewrite.
Revising is part of writing. Few writers are so expert that
they can produce what they are after on the first try. Quite
often you will discover, on examining the completed work,
that there are serious flaws in the arrangement of the material, calling for transpositions. When this is the case, a word
processor can save you time and labor as you rearrange the
manuscript. You can select material on your screen and move
it to a more appropriate spot, or, if you cannot find the right
spot, you can move the material to the end of the manuscript
until you decide whether to delete it. Some \Vriters find that
working with a printed copy of the manuscript helps them to
visualize the process ofchange; others prefer to revise entirelyon screen. Above all, do not be afraid to experiment with
what you have written. Save both the original and the revised
versions; you can always use the computer to restore the
manuscript to its original condition, should that course seem
best. Remember, it is no sign ofweakness or defeat that your
manuscript ends up in need of major surgery. This is a common occurrence in all writing, and among the best writers.

6. Do not ovenvrite.
Rich, ornate prose is hard to digest, generally unwholesome, and sometimes nauseating. If the sickly-sweet word,
the overblown phrase are your natural form of expression,
as is sometimes the case, you will have to compensate for it
by a show of vigor, and by writing something as meritorious
as the Song of Songs, which is Solomon's.
When writing 'vith a computer, you must guard against
wordiness. The click and flow of a word processor can be
seductive, and you may find yourself adding a few unnecessary words or even a whole passage just to experience the
pleasure of running your fingers over the keyboard and
watching your words appear on the screen. It is always a
good idea to reread your writing later and ruthlessly delete
the excess.

AN APPROACH TO STYLE

[73

7. Do not overstate.
When you overstate, readers will be instantly on guard,
and everything that has preceded your overstatement as well
as everything that follows it will be suspect in their minds
because they have lost confidence in your judgment or your
poise. Overstatement is one of the common faults. A single

overstatement, wherever or however it occurs, diminishes
the whole, and a single carefree superlative has the power to
destroy, for readers, the object of your enthusiasm.

8. Avoid the use ofqualifiers.
Rather, very, little, pretty-these are the leeches that
infest the pond of prose, sucking the blood of words. The
constant use of the adjective little (except to indicate size)
is particularly debilitating; we should all try to do a little better' we should all be very watchful of this rule, for it is a
rather important one, and we are pretty sure to violate it
now and then.

9. Do not affect a breezy manner.
The volume ofwriting is enormous, these days, and much
of it has a sort of vvindiness about it, almost as though the
author were in a state of euphoria. "Spontaneous me," sang
Whitman, and, in his innocence, let loose the hordes of uninspired scribblers who would one day confuse spontaneity with genius.
The breezy style is often the work of an egocentric, the
person who imagines that everything that comes to mind is
of general interest and that uninhibited prose creates high
spirits and carries the day: Open any alumni magazine) turn
to the class notes, and you are quite likely to encounter old
Spontaneous Me at work-an aging collegian who writes
something like this:
Well, guys, here I am again dishing the dirt about your
disorderly classmates, after pa$$ing a weekend in the Big
Apple trying to catch the Columbia hoops tilt and then a
cab-ride from hell through the West Side casbah. And
speaking of news, howzabout tossing a few primo items

this way?

74]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

This is an extreme example, but the same wind blows, at
lesser velocities, across vast expanses of journalistic prose.
The author in this case has managed in two sentences to
commit most of the unpardonable sins: he obviously has
nothing to say, he is showing off and directing the attention
of the reader to himself, he is using slang with neither
provocation nor ingenuity, he adopts a patronizing air by
throwing in the word primo, he is humorless (though full of
fun), dull, and empty. He has not done his work. Compare
his opening remarks with the following-a plunge directly
into the news:
Clyde Crawford, who stroked the varsity shell in 1958,
is swinging an oar again after a lapse of forty years. Clyde
resigned last spring as executive sales manager of the Indiana Flotex Company and is now a gondolier in Venice.
This, although conventional, is compact, informative, unpretentious. The writer has dug up an item of news and presented it in a straightforward manner. What the first writer tried to accomplish by cutting rhetorical capers and by
breeziness, the second writer managed to achieve by good
reporting, by keeping a tight rein on his material, and by
staying out of the act.

10. Use orthodox spelling.
In ordinary composition, use orthodox spelling. Do not
write nite for night, thru for through, pleez for please, unless you plan to introduce a complete system of simplified
spelling and are prepared to take the consequences.
In the original edition of The Elements ofStyle, there was
a chapter on spelling. In it, the author had this to say:
The spelling of English words is not fixed and invariable, nor does it depend on any other authority than general agreement. At the present day there is practically
unanimous agreement as to the spelling of most words.
. . . At any given moment, however, a relatively small number of words may be spelled in more than one way. Gradually, as a rule, one of these forms comes to be generally
preferred, and the less customary form comes to look

AN APPROACH TO STYLE

[75

obsolete and is discarded. From time to time new forms,
mostly simplifications, are introduced by innovators, and
either win their place or die of neglect.
The practical objection to unaccepted and oversimplified spellings is the disfavor with which they are received
by the reader. They distract his attention and exhaust his
patience. He reads the form though automatically, without
thought of its needless complexity; he reads the abbreviation tho and mentally supplies the missing letters, at the
cost of a fraction of his attention. The writer has defeated
his own purpose.
The language manages somehow to keep pace with
events. A word that has taken hold in our century is thmway; it was born of necessity and is apparently here to stay.
In combination with way, thru is more senriceable than
through; it is a high-speed word for readers who are going
sixty-five. Throughway would be too long to fit on a road
sign, too slow to serve the speeding eye. It is conceivable that
because of our thruways, through will eventually become
thm-after many more thousands of miles of travel.

11. Do not explain too much.
It is seldom advisable to tell all. Be sparing, for instance,
in the use of adverbs after "he said," "she replied," and the
like: ~'he said consolingly"; Ushe replied grumblingly." Let the
conversation itself disclose the speaker's manner or condition. Dialogue heavily weighted with adverbs after the
attributive verb is cluttery and annoying. Inexperienced
writers not only overwork their adverbs but load their attributives with explanatory verbs: "he consoled," "she congratulated." They do this, apparently, in the belief that the
word said is always in need of support, or because they have
been told to do it by experts in the art of bad writing.

12. Do not constmct awkward adverbs.
Adverbs are easy to build. Take an adjective or a participle, add -ly, and beholdl you have an adverb. But you'd
probably be better off without it. Do not write tangledly.
The word itself is a tangle. Po not even write tiredly. No-

76]

THE E L E MEN T S 0 F STY L E

body says tangledly and not many people say tiredly. Words
that are not used orally are seldom the ones to put on
paper.
He climbed tiredly to
bed.

He climbed wearily to
bed.

The lamp cord lay tangledly beneath her chair.

The lamp cord lay in
tangles beneath her chair.

Do not dress words up by adding -ly to them, as though
putting a hat on a horse.
overly

over

muchly

much

thusly

thus

13. Make sure the reader knows who is speaking.
Dialogue is a total loss unless you indicate who the speaker is. In long dialogue passages containing no attributives,
the reader may become lost and be compelled to go back
and reread in order to puzzle the thing out. Obscurity is an
imposition on the reader, to say nothing of its damage to the
work.
In dialogue, make sure that your attributives do not awkwardly interrupt a spoken sentence. Place them where the
break would come naturally in speech-that is, where the
speaker would pause for emphasis, or take a breath. The
best test for locating an attributive is to speak the sentence
aloud.
"N ow, my boy, we shall
see," he said, "how well you
have learned your lesson."

"Now, my boy," he said,
"we shall see how well you
have learned your lesson."

'What's more, they
would never," she added,
"consent to the plan."

"What's more," she
added, "they would never
consent to the plan."

14. Avoid fancy words.
Avoid the elaborate, the pretentious, the coy, and the
cute. Do not be tempted by a twenty-dollar word when

AN APPROACH TO STYLE

[77

there is a ten-center handy, ready and able. Anglo-Saxon is
a livelier tongue than Latin, so use Anglo-Saxon words. In
this, as in so many matters pertaining to style, one's ear must
be one's guide: gut is a lustier noun than intestine, but the
two words are not interchangeable, because gut is often
inappropriate, being too coarse for the context. Never call
a stomach a tummy without good reason.
If you admire fancy words, if every sky is beauteous, every
blonde curvaceous, every intelligent child prodigious, ifyou
are tickled by discombobulate, you will have a bad time with
Reminder 14. What is wrong, you ask, with beauteous? No
one knows, for sure. There is nothing wrong, really, with any
word-all are good, but some are better than others. A matter of ear, a matter of reading the books that sharpen the ear.
The line between the fancy and the plain, between the
atrocious and the felicitous, is sometimes alarmingly fine.
The opening phrase ofthe Gettysburg address is close to the
line, at least by our standards today, and Mr. Lincoln, knowingly or unlmowingly, was flirting with disaster when he wrote
"Four score and seven years ago." The President could have
got into his sentence with plain "Eighty-sevenu-a saving
of two words and less of a strain on the listeners' powers of
multiplication. But Lincoln's ear must have told him to go
ahead with four score and seven. By doing so, he achieved cadence while skirting the edge of fanciness. Suppose he had
blundered over the line and written, "In the year ofour Lord
seventeen hundred and seventy-six. His speech would
have sustained a heavy blow. Or suppose he had settled for
"Eighty-seven." In that case he would have got into his introductory sentence too quickly; the timing would have been
bad.
The question of ear is vital. Only the writer whose ear is
reliable is in a position to use bad grammar deliberately; this
writer knows for sure when a colloquialism is better than
formal phrasing and is able to sustain the work at a level of
good taste. So cock your ear. Years ago, students were warned
not to end a sentence with a preposition; time, of course,
has softened that rigid decree. Not only is the preposition
acceptable at the end, sometimes it is more effective in that
U

78]

THE E L E MEN T S 0 F STY L E

spot than anywhere else. "A claw hammer, not an ax, was
the tool he murdered her with." This is preferable to C'A
claw hammer, not an ax, was the tool with which he murdered her." Why? Because it sounds more violent, more like
murder. A matter of ear.
And would you write uThe worst tennis player around
here is I" or "The worst tennis player around here is me"?
The first is good grammar, the second is good judgmentalthough the me might not do in all contexts.
The split infinitive is another trick of rhetoric in which
the ear must be quicker than the handbook. Some infinitives seem to improve on being split, just as a stick of round
stovewood does. "I cannot bring myself to really like the fellow." The sentence is relaxed, the meaning is clear, the violation is harmless and scarcely perceptible. Put the other
way, the sentence becomes stiff, needlessly formal. A matter of ear.
There are times when the ear not only guides us through
difficult situations but also saves us from minor or major
embarrassments ofprose. The ear, for example, must decide
when to omit that from a sentence, when to retain it. "She
knew she could do it" is preferable to "She knew that she
could do it"-simpler and just as clear. But in many cases
the that is needed. "He felt that his big nose, which was sunburned, made him look ridiculous." Omit the that and you
have "He felt his big nose...."

15. Do not use dialect unless your ear is good.
Do not attempt to use dialect unless you are a devoted
student of the tongue you hope to reproduce. If you use
dialect, be consistent. The reader will become impatient or
confused upon finding two or more versions of the same
word or expression. In dialect it is necessary to spell phonetically, or at least ingeniously, to capture unusual inflections. Take, for example, the word once. It often appears in
dialect writing as oncet, but oncet looks as though it should
be pronounced "onset." A better spelling would be wunst.
But if you write it oncet once, write it that way throughout.

AN APPROACH TO STYLE

[79

The best dialect writers, by and large, are economical of
their talents; they use the minimum, not the maximum, of
deviation from the norm, thus sparing their readers as well
as convincing them.

16. Be clear.
Clarity is not the prize in writing, nor is it always the
principal mark of a good style. There are occasions when
obscurity serves a literary yearning, if not a literary purpose,
and there are writers whose mien is more overcast than
clear. But since writing is communication, clarity can only
be a virtue. And although there is no substitute for merit in
writing, clarity comes closest to being one. Even to a writer
who is being intentionally obscure or wild of tongue we can
say, "Be obscure clearlyr Be wild of tongue in a way we can
understand!" Even to writers of market letters, telling us
(but not telling us) which securities are promising, we can
say, "Be cagey plainly! Be elliptical in a straightfof\\Tard
fashion!"
Clarity, clarity, clarity. When you become hopelessly
mired in a sentence, it is best to start fresh; do not try to
fight your way through against the terrible odds of syntax.
Usually what is wrong is that the construction has become
too involved at some point; the sentence needs to be broken apart and replaced by two or more shorter sentences.
Muddiness is not merely a disturber of prose, it is also a
destroyer of life, of hope: death on the highway caused by
a badly worded road sign, heartbreak among lovers caused
by a misplaced phrase in a well-intentioned letter, anguish
of a traveler expecting to be met at a railroad station and not
being met because of a slipshod telegram. Think of the
tragedies that are rooted in ambiguity, and be clear! When
you say something, make sure you have said it. The chances
of your having said it are only fair.

17. Do not inject opinion.
Unless there is a good reason for its being there, do not
inject opinion into a piece of writing. We all have opinions

80]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

about almost everything, and the temptation to toss them
in is great. To air one's views gratuitously, however, is to
imply that the demand for them is brisk, which may not be
the case, and which, in any event, may not be relevant to
the discussion. Opinions scattered indiscriminately about
leave the mark of egotism on a work. Similarly, to air one's
views at an improper time may be in bad taste. If you have
received a letter inviting you to speak at the dedication of a
new cat hospital, and you hate cats, your reply, declining the
invitation, does not necessarily have to cover the full range
. of your emotions. You must make it clear that you will not
attend, but you do not have to let fly at cats. The writer of
the letter asked a civil question; attack cats, then, only if you
can do so with good humor, good taste, and in such a way
that your answer will be courteous as well as responsive.
Since you are out of sympathy with cats, you may quite
properly give this as a reason for not appearing at the dedicatory ceremonies of a cat hospital. But bear in mind that
your opinion of cats was not sought, only your services as a
speaker. Try to keep things straight.

·18. Use figures of speech sparingly.
The simile is a common device and a useful one, but similes coming in rapid fire, one right on top of another, are
more distracting than illuminating. Readers need time to
catch their breath; they can't be expected to compare everything with something else, and no relief in sight.
When you use metaphor, do not mix it up. That is, don't
start by calling something a swordfish and end by calling it
an hourglass.

19. Do not take shortcuts at the cost of clarity.
Do not use initials for the names of organizations or
, movements unless you are certain the initials \\!ill be readi.Iy understood. Write things out. Not everyone knows that
MADD means Mothers Against Drunk Driving, and even
if everyone did, there are babies being born every minute
who will someday encounter the name for the first time.
They deserve to see the words, not simply the initials. A

A NAP PRO A C H TO STY L E

[ 81

good rule is to start your article by writing out names in full,
and then, later, when your readers have got their bearings,
to shorten them.
Many shortcuts are self-defeating; they waste the reader's time instead of conserving it. There are all sorts of
rhetorical stratagems and devices that attract writers who
hope to be pithy, but most of them are simply bothersome.
The longest way round is usually the shortest way home,
and the one truly reliable shortcut in writing is to choose
words that are strong and surefooted to carry readers on
their way.

20. Avoid foreign languages.
The writer will occasionally find it convenient or necessary to borrow from other languages. Some writers, however, from sheer exuberance or a desire to show off, sprinkle
their work liberally with foreign expressions, \\lith no regard
for the reader's comfort. It is a bad habit. Write in English.

21. Prefer the standard to the ojJbeat.
Young writers will be drawn at every turn toward eccentricities in language. They will hear the beat of new vocabularies, the exciting rhythms of special segments of their
society, each speaking a language of its own. All of us come
under the spell of these unsettling drums; the problem for
beginners is to listen to them, learn the words, feel the
vibrations, and not he carried away.
Youths invariably speak to other youths in a tongue of
their own devising: they renovate the language with a wild
vigor, as they would a basement apartment. By the time this
paragraph sees print, psyched, nerd, ripoff, dude, geek, and
funky will be the words of yesteryear, and we will be fielding more recent ones that have come bouncing into our
speech-some of them into our dictionary as well. A new
word is always up for survival. Many do survive. Others
grow stale and disappear. Most are, at least in their infancy,
more appropriate to conversation than to composition.
Today, the language of advertising enjoys an enormous
circulation. With its deliberate infractions of grammatical

82]

THE E L E MEN T S 0 F STY L E

roles and its crossbreeding of the parts of speech, it profoundly influences the tongues and pens of children and
adults. Your new kitchen range is so revolutionary it obsoletes all other ranges. Your counter top is beautiful because
it is accessorized with gold-plated faucets. Your cigarette
tastes good like a cigarette should. And, like the man says,
you will want to try one. You will also, in all probability, want
to try writing that way, using that language. You do so at your
peril, for it is the language of mutilation.
Advertisers are quite understandably interested in what
they call "attention getting." The man photographed must
have lost an eye or grown a pink beard, or he must have
three arms or be sitting wrong-end-to on a horse. This technique is proper in its place, which is the world of selling, but
the young writer had best not adopt the device of mutilation in ordinary composition, whose purpose is to engage,
not paralyze, the reader's senses. Buy the gold-plated faucets
ifyou will, but do not accessorize your prose. To use the language well, do not begin by hacking it to bits; accept the
whole body of it, cherish its classic form, its variety, and its
richness.
Another segment of society that has constructed a language of its own is business. People in business say that
toner cartridges are in short supply, that they have updated the next shipment of these cartridges, and that they
will finalize their recommendations at the next meeting of
the board. They are speaking a language familiar and dear
to them. Its portentous nouns and verbs invest ordinary
events with high adventure; executives walk among toner
cartridges, caparisoned like knights. We should tolerate
them----every person of spirit wants to ride a white horse.
The only question is whether business vocabulary is helpful to ordinary prose. Usually, the same ideas can be expressed less formidably, if one makes the effort. A good
many of the speCial words ofbusiness seem designed more
to express the user's dreams than to express a precise
meaning. Not all such words, of course, can be dismissed
summarily; indeed, no word in the language can be dis-

AN APPROACH TO STYLE

[83

missed offhand by anyone who has a healthy curiosity.
Update isn't a bad word; in the right setting it is useful. In
the wrong setting, though, it is destructive, and the trouble
with adopting coinages too quickly is that they will bedevil
one by insinuating themselves where they do not belong.
This may sound like rhetorical snobbery, or plain stuffiness;
but you will discover, in the course of your work, that the
setting of a word is just as restrictive as the setting of a
jewel. The general rule here is to prefer the standard.
Finalize, for instance, is not standard; it is special, and it is
a peculiarly fuzzy and silly word. Does it mean "terminate,"
or does it mean "put into final form"? One can't be sure,
really, what it means, and one gets the impression that the
person using it doesn't know, either, and doesn't want to
know.
The special vocabularies of the law, of the military, of government are familiar to most of us. Even the world of criticism has a modest pouch of private words (luminous, taut),
whose only virtue is that they are exceptionally nimble and
can escape from the garden of meaning over the waIl. Of
these critical words, Wolcott Gibbs once wrote, "... they
are detached from the language and inflated like little balloons." The young writer should learn to spot them-words
that at first glance seem freighted with delicious meaning
but that soon burst in air, leaving nothing but a memory of
bright sound.
The language is perpetually in flux: it is a living stream,
shifting, changing, receiving new strength from a thousand
tributaries, losing old forms in the backwaters of time. To
suggest that a young writer not swim in the main stream of
this turbulence would be foolish indeed, and such is not
the intent ofthese cautionary remarks. The intent is to suggest that in choosing between the formal and the informal,
the regular and the offbeat, the general and the special, the
orthodox and the heretical, the beginner err on the side of
conservatism, on the side of established usage. No idiom
is taboo, no accent forbidden; there is simply a better
chance of doing well if the writer holds a steady course,

84]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

enters the stream of English quietly, and does not thrash
about.
"But," you may ask, '''what if it comes natural to me to
experiment rather than conform? What if I am a pioneer, or
even a genius?' Answer: then be one. But do not forget that
what may seem like pioneering may be merely evasion, or
laziness-the disinclination to submit to discipline. Writing
good standard English is no cinch, and before you have
managed it you will have encountered enough rough country to satisfY even the most adventurous spirit.
Style takes its final shape more from attitudes of mind
than from principles of composition, for, as an elderly practitioner once remarked, 'Writing is an act offaith, not a trick
of grammar." This moral observation would have no place
in a rule book were it not that style is the writer, and therefore what you are, rather than what you know, will at last
determine your style. Ifyou write, you must believe-in the
truth and worth of the scrawl, in the ability of the reader to
receive and decode the message. No one can write decently who is distrustful of the reader's intelligence, or whose
attitude is patronizing.
Many references have been made in this book to "the
reader," who has been much in the news. It is now necessary to warn you that your concern for the reader must be
pure: you must sympathize with the reader's plight (most
readers are in trouble about half the time) but never seek
to lmow the reader's wants. Your whole duty as a writer is to
please and satiSfy yourself, and the true writer always plays
to an audience of one. Start sniffing the air, or glancing at
the Trend Machine, and you are as good as dead, although
you may make a nice living.
Full of belief, sustained and elevated by the power of
purpose, armed with the rules of grammar, you are ready
for exposure. At this point, you may well pattern yourself
on the fully exposed cow of Robert Louis Stevenson's
rhyme. This friendly and commendable animal, you may
recall, was "blown by all the winds that pass /And wet with

AN APPROACH TO STYLE

[85

all the showers." And so must you as a young writer be. In
our modern idiom, we would say that you must get wet all
over. Mr. Stevenson, working in a plainer style, said it with
felicity, and suddenly one cow, out of so many, received the
gift of immortality. Like the steadfast writer, she is at home
in the wind and the rain; and, thanks to one moment of
felicity, she will live on and on and on.

Afterword
Will Strunk and E. B. White were unique collaborators.
Unlike Gilbert and Sullivan, or Woodward and Bernstein,
they worked separately and decades apart.
We have no way of knowing whether Professor Strunk
took particular notice of Elwyn Brooks White, a student of
his at Cornell University in 1919. Neither teacher nor pupil
could have realized that their names would be linked as they
now are. Nor could they have imagined that thirty-eight
years after they met, White would take this little gem of a
textbook that Strunk had written for his students, polish it,
expand it, and transfonn it into a classic.
E. B. White shared Strunk's sympathy for the reader. To
Strunk's do's and don'ts he added passages about the power
of words and the clear expression of thoughts and feelings.
To the nuts and bolts of grammar he added a rhetorical
dimension.
The editors ofthis edition have followed in White's footsteps, once again providing fresh examples and modernizing usage where appropriate. The Elements of Style is still
a little book, small enough and important enough to carry
in your pocket, as I carry mine. It has helped me to write
better. I believe it can do the same for you.
Charles Osgood

87

Glossary
adjectival modifier

A word, phrase, or clause that
acts as an adjective in qualifying the meaning of a noun or
pronoun. Your country; a tum-of-the-century style; people

who are always late.
adjective A word that modifies, quantifies, or otherwise describes a noun or pronoun., Drizzly November; midnight dreary; only requirement.

adverb

A word that modifies or otherwise qualifies a
verb, an adjective, or another adverb. Gestures gracefully;

exceptionally quiet engine.
adverbial phrase A phrase that functions as an adverb.
(See phrase.) Landon laughs with abandon.
agreement The correspondence ofa verb with its subject in person and number (Karen goes to Cal Tech; her sisters go to UCLA), and of a pronoun with its antecedent in
person, number, and gender (As soon as Karen finished the
exam, she picked up her books and left the room).

antecedent The noun to which a pronoun refers. A
pronoun and its antecedent must agree in person, number,
and gender. Michael and his teammates moved off campus.
A noun or noun phrase that renames or
adds identifying information to a noun it immediately follows. His brother, an accountant with Arthur Andersen, was
recently promoted.

appositive

89

90]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

articles The words a, an, and the, which signal or
introduce nouns. The definite article the refers to a particular item: the report. The indefinite articles a and an refer
to a general item or one not already mentioned: an apple.
auxiliary verb A verb that combines with the main
verb to show differences in tense, person, and voice. The
most common auxiliaries are forms of be, do, and have. I am
.going; we did not go; they have gone. (See also modal auxiliaries. )
The form of a noun or pronoun that reflects its
grammatical function in a sentence as subject (they), object
(them), or possessor (their). She gave her employees a raise
that pleased them greatly.

case

clause A group ofrelated words that contains a subject
and predicate. Moths swarm around a burning candle.
While she tvas taking the test, Karen muttered to herself.

colloquialism A word or expression appropriate to
informal conversation but not usually suitable for academic
or business writing. They wanted to get even (instead ofthey
wanted to retaliate).

complement A word or phrase (especially a noun or
adjective) that completes the predicate. Subject complements complete linking verbs and rename or describe the
subject: Martha is my neighbor. She seems shy. Object
complements complete transitive verbs by describing or
renaming the direct object: They found the play exciting.
Robert considers Mary a wonderful wife.
compound sentence Two or more independent clauses
joined by a coordinating conjunction, a correlative conjunction, or a semicolon. Caesar conquered Gaul, but Alexander
the Great conquered the world.

compound subject Two or more simple subjects joined

by a coordinating or correlative conjunction. Hemingway
and Fitzgerald had little in common.

G LOS SA R Y

[91

conjunction A word that joins words, phrases, clauses,
or sentences. The coordinating conjunctions, and, but, or,
nor, yet, so, for, join grammatically equivalent elements.
Correlative conjunctions (both, and; either, or; neither, nor)
join the same kinds of elements.

.

contraction A shortened form of a word or group of
words: can~t for cannot; they're for they are.
correlative expression

See conjunction.

dependent clause

A group of words that includes a
subject and verb but is subordinate to an independent clause
in a sentence. Dependent clauses begin with either a subordinating conjunction, such as if, because, since, or a relative pronoun, such as who, which, that. When it gets dark,
we'll find a restaurant that htl8 music.

direct object A noun or pronoun that receives the
action of a transitive verb. Pearson publishes books.

gerund The -ing form of a verb that functions as a
noun: Hiking is good exercise. She was praised for her
playing.
indefinite pronoun A pronoun that refers to an unspecified person (anybody) or thing (something).
independent clause

A group of words with a subject
and verb that can stand alone as a sentence. Raccoons steal
food.

indirect object A noun or pronoun that indicates to
whom or for whom, to what or for what the action ofa transitive verb is performed. I asked her a question. Ed gave the
door a kick.

infinitive/split infinitive In the present tense, a verb
phrase consisting of to followed by the base form of the
verb (to write). A split infinitive occurs when one or more
words separate to and the verb (to boldly go).
intransitive verb A verb that does not take a direct
object. His nerve failed.

92]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

linking verb A verb that joins the subject of a sentence to its complement. Professor Chapman is a philosophy teacher. They were ecstatic.
loose sentence A sentence that begins with the main
idea and then attaches modifiers, qualifiers, and additional
details: He was determined to succeed, with or without the
promotion he was hoping for and in spite of the difficulties
he was confronting at every tum.
main clause An independent clause, which can stand
alone as a grammatically complete sentence. Grammarians
quibble.

modal auxiliaries Any of the verbs that combine
with the main verb to express necessity (must), obligation
(should), permission (may), probability (might), possibility
(could), ability (can), or tentativeness (would). Mary might
wash the car.
modifier A word or phrase that qualifies, describes, or
limits the meaning of a word, phrase, or clause. Frayed ribbon, dancing flowers, worldly wisdom.
nominative pronoun A pronoun that functions as a
subject or a subject complement: I, we, you, he, she, it, they,

who.
nonrestrictive modifier A phrase or clause that does
not limit or restrict the essential meaning of the element it
modifies. My youngest niece, who lives in Ann Arbor, is a
magazine editor.

noun

A word that names a person, place, thing, or

idea. Most nouns have a plural form and a possessive form.
Carol; the park; the cup; denwcracy.

number A feature of nouns, pronouns, and a few
verbs, referring to singular or plural. A subject and its corresponding verb must be consistent in number; a pronoun
should agree in number with its antecedent. A solo flute
plays; two oboes join in.

GLOSSARY

[93

object The noun or pronoun that completes a prepositional phrase or the meaning of a transitive verb. (See also
direct object, indirect object, and preposition. ) Frost offered
his audience a poetic perfor11Ulnce they would likely never
forget.

participial phrase A present or past partiCiple with
accompanying modifiers, objects, or complements. The
buzzards, circling with sinister determination, squawked
loudly.

participle A verbal that functions as an adjective. Present partiCiples end in -ing (brimming); past partiCiples typically end in -d or -ed (injured) or -en (broken) but may
appear in other forms (brought, been, gone).
periodic sentence A sentence that expresses the main
idea at the end. With or without their parents' consent, and
whether or not they receive the assignment relocation they
requested, they are determined to get married.

phrase

A group of related words that functions as a

unit but lacks a subject, a verb, or both. Without the re-

sources to continue.
possessive

The case of nouns and pronouns that indicates ownership or possession (Harold's, ours, mine).

predicate The verb and its related words in a clause
or sentence. The predicate expresses what the subject does,
experiences, or is. Birds fly. The partygoers celebrated wild-

ly for a long time.
preposition A word that relates its object (a noun,
pronoun, or -ing verb form) to another word in the sentence. She is the leader of our group. We opened the door
by picking the lock. She went out the window.
prepositional phrase A group of words consisting of
a preposition, its object, and any of the objecfs modifiers.
Georgia on my mind.

94]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

principal verb The predicating verb in a main clause
or sentence.
pronominal possessive
hers, its, and theirs.

Possessive pronouns such as

proper noun The name of a particular person (Frank
Sinatra), place (Boston), or thing (Moby Dick). Proper
nouns are capitalized. Common nouns name classes of
people (singers), places (cities), or things (books) and are
not capitalized.
relative clause A clause introduced by a relative pronoun, such as who, which, that, or by a relative adverb, such
as where, when, why.

relative pronoun A pronoun that connects a dependent clause to a main clause in a sentence: who, whom,
whose, which, that, what, whoever, whomever, whichever,
and whatever.

restrictive term, element, clause A phrase or clause
that limits the essential meaning of the sentence element it
modifies or identifies. Professional athletes who perform
exceptionally should earn stratospheric salaries. Since there
are no commas before and after the italicized clause, the
italicized clause is restrictive and suggests that only those
athletes who perform exceptionally are entitled to such
salaries. If commas were added before who and after exceptionally, the clause would be nonrestrictive and would
suggest that all professional athletes should receive stratospheric salaries.

sentence fragment A group ofwords that is not grammaticallya complete sentence but is punctuated as one:
Because it mattered greatly.
subject The noun or pronoun that indicates what a
sentence is about, and which the principal verb of a sentence elaborates. The new Steven Spielberg movie is a box
office hit.

G LOS S A R Y

[ 95

subordinate clause A clause dependent on the main
clause in a sentence. After we finish our work, we will go
out for dinner.
syntax The order or arrangement of words in a sentence. Syntax may exhibit parallelism (1 came, I saw, I
conquered), inversion (Whose woods these are I think I
know), or other formal characteristics.

tense The time of a verb's action or state ofbeing, such
as past, present, or future. Saw, see, will see.
transition A word or group of words that aids coherence in writing by showing the connections between ideas.
William Carlos Williams was influenced by the poetry of
Walt Whitman. Moreover, Williams's emphasis on the present and the immediacy of the ordinary represented a rejection of the poetic stance and style of his contemporary T. S.
Eliot. In addition, Williams's poetry ....
transitive verb A verb that requires a direct object to
complete its meaning: They washed their new car. An
intransitive verb does not require an object to complete its
meaning: The audience laughed. Many verbs can be both:
The wind blew furiously. My car blew a gasket.

verb

A word or group of words that expresses the
action or indicates the state of being of the subject. Verbs
activate sentences.
verbal A verb form that functions in a sentence as a
noun, an adjective, or an adverb rather than as a principal
verb. Thinking can be fun. An embroidered handkerchief.
(See also gerund, infinitive, and participle. )
voice The attribute of a verb that indicates whether its
subject is active (Janet played the guitar) or passive (The
guitar was played by Janet).

Glossary prepared by Robert DiYanni.

Index
alternate vs. altemative 40
among vs. between 40
and

alan
in parallel construction
27
in titles 38
abbreviations
punctuation of 3
and writing style 80-81
accordingly, semicolon with
6
active voice 18-19
adjectival modifier 12
adjective(s)
cOIIlpound,hyphenin
34-35
and writing style 71
adverb(s) 6
awkward 75-76
sparing use of 75
adverbial phrase 44
advertising, language of
81-82
affect vs. effect 45
aggravate vs. irritate 39
agreement, subject-verb
9-11

comma before 5,6
loose sentences with 25
parallelism with 27
subjects joined by 10
while as substitute for 63
and/or, misuse of 40
Anglo-Saxon vs. Latin 77
antecedent(s)
position in sentence

29-30
anticipate vs. expect 40-41
anybody
vs. any body 41
pronoun after 60
anyone vs. anyone 41
apostrophe, use of 1
appositive
introductory 13
position in sentence 30
pronoun as 12
punctuation of 4-5,9
article(s)
in parallel construction
27
in titles 38

all right 39
Allingham, William 71
allude 40
allusion vs. illusion 40
alrrwst vs. most 53along these lines 52

as
comma before 5
VS. like
51-52, 82
97

98]

THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE

as good or better than 41
as regards 49
as to whether 41
as well as, subjects joined by
10

as yet 41
31,

75,76
20

being, misuse of 41, 56
besides, semicolon with 6

between vs. among 40
both ... and, parallelism with
27
breezy style 73-74
brevity. See concise writing
business, language of 82--83
business finns) names of 2

but
comma before

with abbreviations 3
in compound sentence
6--7
before conjunction

attributives, in dialogue
auxiliary verb(s)
modal 20

colon, use of 7-8
comma(s)

5

loose sentences with 25
use of 41-42·
while as substitute for 63

can
vs. may 42
sparing use of 20
care less, misuse of 42
case
of pronouns 11-13
case (noun), misuse of 42

certainly 42
character; misuse of 42
claim (verb) 42-43
clarity in writing 79
clause(s)
punctuation of 3-7
restrictive vs. nonrestrictive
3-5,59

clever 43
colloquialism(s) 34

5,6
in dates 2-3
with parenthetical
expressions 2-5
vs. period 7
with quotations 36
serial 2

compare to vs. compare with
43
comparisons
case of pronoun in 12
than in 59
complement
inverted position of 33
in periodic sentence 32

composed of vs. divided into
44
composition, principles of

15-33
compound adjective, hyphen
in 34-35
compound sentence
comma in 6-7
semicolon in 5-6
compound subject
verb form after 10

comprise 43
concise writing 23-24
active voice and 18-19
positive statements and

19-20
concrete language

21-23

conditional verbs 20
conjunction(s)
comma with 5, 6
loose sentences with

parallelism with 27

25

INDEX

consider vs. considered as
43
contact (verb) 43
contraction
vs. possessive 1
coordinating conjunctions
comma with 5, 6
loose sentences with 25
cope with 44
correlative conjunctions
comma with 5
parallelism with 27
could, sparing use of 20
currently, misuse of 44

[99

each
pronoun after 60
verb form after 10
each and every one 45
eccentric vs. standard
language 81-84
effect vs. affect 45
e.g., punctuation of 3
either, verb form after 10
either. . . or, parallel
construction with 27
elude vs. allude 40
emphatic word/expression
position in sentence

32-33
dash, use of 9
data 44
dates
numerals vs. words for 35
punctuation of 2-3
degrees (academic),
punctuation of 3
dependent clause
punctuation of 5
design 15, 70-71
details, reporting 21-22
dialect 78-79
dialogue
adverbs in 75
attributives in 31, 75, 76
dates and numbers in 35
paragraphing of 16
sentence fragment in 7
tense in 31
different than, misuse of 44
direct address, name or title
in 3
direct object 36
disinterested vs. uninterested

44

as sentence fragment

7

enonnity 45
enthuse, misuse of 45
enumeration, comma in 2
etc. 45-46
punctuation of 3
every, compound subject
qualified by 10
everybody
vs. every body 41
pronoun after 60
verb form after 10
everyone
pronoun after 60
verb form after 10
except, subjects joined by 10
exclamations 34
expect vs. anticipate 40-41

facility 46
fact 46
(the) fact is . ..

(the) fact that
factor 46

60
24

fancy words, avoiding

divided into vs. composed of

farther vs.further 46

44
dueto 44-45

Faulkner, William
feature 47

68

76-78

100]

THE E L E MEN T S 0 F STY L E

fewer vs.less 51
figures of speech 80
jtnaUze 47,82,83
first . . . , second . . . , third,
parallelism with 27
firstly . .. , secondly . .. ,
thirdly, misuse of 57
fix (verb) 47
flammable 47
folk 47
for, comma before 5,6
for conscience' sake 1
foreign words 81
form, principles of 34-38
Forster, E. M., 25-26
fortuitous 47
Frost, Robert 68-69
funny 50
further vs.farther 46

gerund
vs. participle 13, 55-56
possessive case with 12
get 48
Gibbs, Wolcott 83
gratuitous 48

have got 48
he is a man who 48
he or she, avoiding 60-61
he said, in dialogue 31, 75,

76
headings 34
Hemingway, Ernest
hopefully 48
however 48-49
hyphen 34-35

importantly, misuse of 49
in addition to, subjects joined
by 10
in regard to 49
in terms of 50
in the last analysis 49
indefinite pronouns
possessive case of 1
independent clause(s)
colon after 7-8
comma before conjunction
introducing 5
comma separating 6-7
semicolon separating 5-6
indirect discourse, tense in

31
indirect object 89
infer vs. imply 49
infinitive
split 58, 78
inside of 49
insightful 50
interesting 50
intransitive verb 44, 51
introductory phrase
participial 13-14
punctuation of 5
irregardless, misuse of 50
irritate vs. aggravate 39
ifs vs. its 1
-ize 50

Jr., punctuation of

3

68

I vs. myself 12
i.e., punctuation of 3
illusion vs. allusion 40
imitation, in writing 70
imply vs. infer 49

kind of 51, 62

Latin vs. Anglo-Saxon
lay 51
leave vs.let 51
lend vs.loan 52
less vs. fewer 51
let vs. leave 51
lie vs. lay 51

77

.

,

'.

like vs. as 51-52, 82
Lincoln, Abraham 77
linking verb(s)
agreement with subject
11
literal/literally 52
little 73
loan vs. lend 52
logical predicate 32
loose sentence(s) 25-26
-ly, awkward use of
75-76

main clause
punctuation of 5-7
statement supplementing
4
mannerisms 17, 42
margins 35
may
vs. can 42
sparing use of 20
meaningful 53
memento 53
metaphor, use of 80
might, sparing use of 20
modal auxiliaries
sparing use of 20
modifier(s)
adjectival 12
position of 30-31
rrwst vs. alrrwst 53
myself vs. I 12
names (offinns), comma in
2
names (of persons)
in direct address 3
possessive case of 1
nature 53
nauseous vs. nauseated 53
needless words, omitting
23-..24

,

INDEX

[101

negative statements, avoiding
19-20
neither, verb form after 10
nice 53
no less than, subjects joined
by 10
nobody
vs. no body 41
verb form after 10
nominative pronoun 12
none, verb form after 10
nonrestrictive clause 59
punctuation of 3-5
nor
comma before 5
vs. or 53-54
not, misuse of 19-20
not . .. but, parallel
construction with 27
not only . .. but also, parallel
construction with 27
noun(s)
in apposition. See
appositive
possessive case of 1·
used as verb 54
and writing style 71-72
number
of verb 9-11
numerals 35
object
direct 36
indirect 89
pronoun as 11, 12
object complements
inverted position of 33
in periodic sentence 32
offputting 54
one 54-55
one of, verb form after 9-10
one of the rrwst 55
ongoing 54

102]

THE E L E MEN T S 0 F STY L E

opinion, injecting in writing
79-80
or
in and/or 40
comma before 5
vs. nor 53--54
oral vs. verbal 63
-oriented 55
OlWell, George 22-23
overstatement 73
overwriting 72
Paine, Thomas 67
paragraphs 15-17
parallel construction 26--28
parentheses 36
references in 37
parenthetical expressions
2-5
partially vs. partly 55
participial phrase
introductory 13-14
punctuation of 4-5
participle
as verbal 13, 55-56
passive voice 18
past tense, in indirect
discourse 31
people 56
period vs. comma 7
periodic sentence
effectiveness of 32
vs. loose sentence 25, 26
personal pronouns
case of 11-13
, after each/every 60
personalize 56
personally 56
persons 56
phrase
adverbial 44
participial 4-5, 13-14
prepositional 13-14

positive statements 19-20
possess 56--57
possessive
apostrophe in 1
with gerund 12
with participle 55-56
pronominal 1
of pronouns 12
before titles 38
predicate
logical 32
preposition(s)
at end of sentence

77-78
in parallel construction
27
prepositional phrase
at beginning of sentence
13-14
present participle, as verbal
13,55-56
present tense, in summaries
31
presently 57
prestigious 57
pretty 73
principal verb 29
pronominal possessive 1
pronoun(s)
antecedent of 29, 60
case of 11-13
after each/every 60
indefinite 1
nominative 12
relative 29
proper nouns
in direct address 3
possessive case of 1
proverbial expressions 37
qualifiers, avoiding 73
quotation(s) 36-37
colon introducing 8

IN D EX

quotation marks
for colloquialisms 34
punctuation with 36

[103

somebody
pronoun after
vs. some body

60

41

someone
rather 73
refer vs. allude
references

40

37

regard . .. as 41
regretful vs. regrettable 57
relate, misuse of 57
relative clause
following one of 9-10
position in sentence 30
punctuation of 4
relative pronoun
position in sentence 29
repeated action, expressing

64-65
respective/respectively 57
restrictive clause 59
punctuation of 4-5
restrictive term of
identification 3
revising 72

-8, use of 1
said, in dialogue

31,

75,76
secondly, misuse of 57
semicolon
in compound sentence

5-6
while replaced by 63
sentence fragment 7
sentence structure
28--31
emphatic 32-33
prepositions in 77-78
serial comma 2
shall vs. will 58
should, sparing use of 20
similes, use of 80

so 58

pronoun after 60
verb form after 10

sort of 51
specific language

1&-23

spelling 74-75
Spencer, Herbert 22
split infinitive 58, 78
Stafford,]ean 21-22
standard English 83-84
state (verb) 58
Stevenson, Robert Louis

84-85
structural design

student body

15, 70-71

58

style 66-69,84-85
guidelines for 70-84
subject(s)
agreement with verb 9--11
compound 10
emphatic position of 33
position in sentence 29
pronoun~ 11-12
subject complements
inverted position of 33
subordinate clause
punctuation of 5
summaries 31-32
superfluous words/phrases
23-24, 72
syllabication 38
syntax 2&-31
inversion 32-33
parallelism 26--28
tense
in summaries

31--32

than
case of pronoun after
use of 59

12

104]

TH E E LE ME NTS OF STYLE

thanking you in advance
59

uninterested vs. disinterested

that

unique

omitting 78
quotations introduced by

37
redundant use of 48
vs. which 59

the
in parallel construction

27
in titles 38
the fact is . . . 60

the fact that

24

the foreseeable future 59
the truth is . .. 60
then, semicolon with 6
there is/are, substituting

18-19
therefore, semicolon with
6

they vs. he/she 60-61
thirdly, misuse of 57
this, ambiguous reference
61
thrust 61

thus, semicolon with 6
time, notation of 8
titles (of persons),
punctuation of 3
titles (of works) 8, 38
together with, subjects joined
by 10
tortuous vs. torturous 62
transition
sentences of 16-17
transitive verb(s) 44, 51
and vigorous writing

18-19
transpire 62
(the) truth is . . . 60
try to vs. try and 62
type vs. kind of 62

44

updnte

62
82, 83

us, as appositive 12
utilize vs. use 63
verb(s)
agreement with subject

9-11
auxiliary 20
coining with -ize 50
intransitive 44, 51
linking 11
position in sentence 29
principal 29
transitive 18-19
used as noun 54
and writing style 71-72
verbal(s)
gerund as 12, 55-56
participle as 13, 55-56
verbalvs. oral 63
very 63,73
voice, active 18-19

when
clause introduced by 4
in loose sentences 25
where
clause introduced by 4
in loose sentences 25
which
ambiguity in use of 30

clause introduced by 4
in loose sentences 25
vs. that 59
which was

24

while
comma before 5
in loose sentences
use of 63-64
Whitman, Walt 69

25

IN DE X

who
clause introduced by 4
following one of 9-10
in loose sentences 25
redundant use of 48
vs. whom 4
who is 24
will vs. shall 58
-wise 64,67
with, subjects joined by
10
Wolfe, Thomas 67-68
word division 38
word order 28-31
for emphasis 32-33

wordiness, avoiding

[105

23-24,

72
worth while/worthwhile 64

would
for repeated action 64-65
sparing use of 20
writing
benefits of 70
difficulties with 69
ear for 77~78
principles of 15-33

style of 66-85

yet 41
you vs. yourself 12

REFERENCE

$695

SiRUNK 'N. WHITE
THE ELEMENTS OF STYLE
"Buy IY, ITUDY IY, ENJOY IY.

Irs

YIMEL.E

OOIC CAN

1

IN OUII AGE 0 .. VOL.U"'L.'"."

•

..

1_

"No IOOOIC IN .HOIInll ."AC"'. WIYH HWEII WOIIOS. WIL.L. H"L.O' "NY
w .. , n ....0 .... YHAN TOOl" ....... ,.nNT L.,nL.E VOL.UME.·'
1
H
~ (
"WHIU I. 0001: 0" TNE "E.T "TYL.I.T• .0.000 "O.T LUCIO "'000. '00
TOOl. COUNTIIY. WNAT NE . " U .... 0 001. wAY 00' ."VING IT .....
"QU ..LL.Y IIEW.... DI ..G...
I
"THE WO.. IC "EMA'N." NO ........ E'L.: D'''ECT. CO""ECT, .0.000
OELI .. HY.. UL....
I
" ...• HOUL.D "E THE QAIL.Y CO

NION 00' AN"ON'" WHO w",TE. "Oil

.. L.'V'N" "ND. "Oil THAT ....nE

"N"ONIl WNO W",TIl. "T "LL."

'on,

I,

"Too,. UCEL.L.ENT "OOIC, WHICH SHOUL.D .... 0 .... TO COLL.""E WITH
EV""" ..IIE.HMAN, ' . "ECQGNI,z",D A. TN", .UT .. OOIC 0" 'T. K,NO
WI! NAV"."
• t
h
1',
"IT'. HA"D TO 'MAG'NI ..00 ENG'N"',," Oil
NAGIl.. WHO o<n.N'T
NUD TO U ........ N'''.EL.'' '00 ENGLI.N .._
trY 0" 00'. JO".
IT'. "LSO 00.0.110 TO ' ....... '00 .... W .. ,U.. WHO WILL NOT "E '''_OVED
"" .. LI."""L. ......L.'CATION 0 ..

T1u EII_.... fJjSryk."
I

Villi our \loeb Gallery.t
h'lP: """......bacOfl.Cum ror
"'lilted '""" and 'uppor! matonal.

!IIU

o 16092 0544

•

I

d.W~

$6.95 U 5
5999 CANADA

•ISBN

D-2DS-3C902-X


